Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Generalized-CVO: Fast and Correspondence-Free Local Point Cloud Registration with Second Order Riemannian Optimization
View PDFAbstract:We propose a fast and correspondence-free local point cloud registration method that leverages geometric surface structure and reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) embeddings. The method represents point clouds as continuous functions with point-wise anisotropic kernels that encode local geometry. This formulation improves alignment along surface normals while relaxing alignment along tangential directions. To solve the resulting registration problem, we propose a second-order on-manifold optimization scheme with approximate Riemannian Hessians, achieving a speedup of up to 10x over the first-order solvers used in prior correspondence-free RKHS-based methods. We demonstrate improved frame-to-frame LiDAR and RGB-D tracking accuracy across diverse indoor and outdoor datasets. On a LiDAR tracking registration task in the driving domain, we achieve a reduction of $>55\%$ in both translational and rotational drift in challenging feature-sparse environments. On object registration benchmarks, we show improved robustness over ICP-based methods and further gains when refining global initialization, particularly under moderate misalignment.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.