Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Language-Guided Abstraction for Visual Reasoning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) is viewed as a critical avenue to Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), as it enables models to learn abstract transformation rules from few-shot examples and then generalize to new tasks. However, prevalent ARC methodology is either pure language or vision-only (i.e., VARC). The former depends heavily on LLMs, consuming billions of parameters. The latter often struggles to capture high-level semantics, leading to overfitting on pixel-level patterns. To bridge this gap, we propose L-VARC, a novel framework that enhances visual reasoning via a language-guided Learning Using Privileged Information (LUPI) branch. Specifically, we design a Semantic Compression Module by feeding a unified, task-agnostic prompt into DeepSeek-V3. In this way, the raw LARC (a crowd-sourced language description dataset) can be substantially refined and structured, fitting with the context length constraint of standard text encoders (e.g., CLIP). Moreover, we design a Cross-Attention Projector to align visual features with semantic embeddings, aiming to guide the training of the ARC model. Notably, the LUPI branch is taken in the training process and will be discarded during inference, thereby yielding a lightweight model with a mere 18 million parameters. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our L-VARC effectively leverages linguistic priors to boost visual reasoning and outperforms state-of-the-art. Ablation studies further confirm the contribution of the two new designs towards the L-VARC framework. The code is available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.