Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:SPACE: Source-free Proxy Anchor Concept Erasure for MLLMs
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:As Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) face growing privacy risks and regulatory constraints, machine unlearning (MU) has emerged as a crucial solution for removing sensitive data while preserving model performance. However, existing MU methods typically rely on visual data of the target concepts, which is often unavailable due to strict data retention policies, thus creating a demand for source-free unlearning approaches that operate without access to the target data. In this work, we propose Source-free Proxy Anchor Concept Erasure (SPACE), the first source-free unlearning framework specialized for MLLMs. SPACE consists of two stages: (1) Text-Guided Proxy Anchor Selection (TPAS), which retrieves semantically aligned proxy anchors from the shared feature space. (2) Dual-Constraint Semantic Isolation (DCSI), which optimizes these anchors to indirectly erase target concepts. DCSI confines updates to the null space of retained knowledge, ensuring structural integrity. We theoretically prove that SPACE strictly bounds the perturbation on retained knowledge and maximizes feature spectral entropy, thereby maintaining the model's performance. Furthermore, extensive experiments across six datasets show that SPACE achieves performance comparable to that of state-of-the-art data-dependent methods, validating its effectiveness in source-free MU scenarios. The source code will be released.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.