Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:Darwin Mobile Agent: A Roadmap for Self-Evolution
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The goal of artificial intelligence is to create agents capable of general, adaptive behaviour in open-ended environments. Guided by the "Bitter Lesson", we argue that the most effective path toward this goal is to systematically remove human priors and allow intelligence to naturally emerge through interaction with a "Big World" that is orders of magnitude more complex than the agent itself. We propose the mobile Graphical User Interface (GUI) as a practical proxy for such a world and introduce Darwin Mobile Agent, an open-source infrastructure designed as a foundation for autonomous reinforcement learning in this domain. This framework addresses the data-collection bottleneck in real-world mobile interactions by using an asynchronous agent-environment loop across parallel cloud-phone instances. We further propose a conceptual roadmap to systematically remove human priors from three fundamental pillars of a self-evolving agent: task curricula, outcome verification, and memory management. We validate that the Darwin infrastructure provides the stability and scalability required for the first stage of this roadmap: policy optimisation in the GUI domain. This work establishes the practical and theoretical foundation necessary to move toward truly autonomous, self-evolving GUI agents.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.