Platform 37 and The AI Exchange: new spaces for AI innovation and discovery
The UK is a center of extraordinary technological innovation with incredible talent and world-class institutions. Later this year, Google will build on this heritage by establishing our landmark King’s Cross building in London alongside a historic European railway hub.
Today, we’re unveiling the building’s name, Platform 37, and plans for The AI Exchange, a new public space dedicated to deepening understanding of artificial intelligence.
Platform 37: A hub for AI innovation
The name is a nod to the building’s location next to King’s Cross station and to “Move 37,” a pivotal play made by DeepMind’s AI system AlphaGo in a now-legendary 2016 match against Go world champion Lee Sae Dol. Go is incredibly complex, with more possible board configurations than the number of atoms in the known universe, and has long been a proving ground for AI research. “Move 37” was so unconventional that human experts initially thought it was a mistake. But as the game unfolded, it became clear it enabled AlphaGo to win the game.
AlphaGo’s victory heralded the beginning of what is now recognized as the modern era in AI, and catalyzed our work using AI to tackle scientific problems. Since that breakthrough, our AI systems have helped accelerate advances in fields like materials discovery, fusion energy research, mathematical reasoning and biology.
This summer, Google DeepMind and Google teams will begin to move into Platform 37. Together our world-leading AI researchers, engineers, ethicists and others will build on our track record of safe and responsible AI development.
The AI Exchange: A public space to explore and discuss AI
We’re creating The AI Exchange as a place where people can learn about AI and discuss the technology’s impact on society. Visitors will be able to engage with a broad range of AI topics through free educational programming, interactive exhibitions and cultural events.
Opening later this year, The AI Exchange is designed to be a welcoming community space and will be part of Platform 37’s ground floor.
Sustainable and flexible design: Google’s most ambitious building yet
Designed by the brilliant Bjarke Ingels and Heatherwick Studio, Platform 37 is Google’s most ambitious and innovative building to date. It uses low-carbon construction materials and is highly energy-efficient.
Architecturally, Platform 37’s innovative “hung” structure creates a flexible, column-free interior workspace that can be adapted to our team's creative needs. Outside, we’ve collaborated with the London Wildlife Trust and the borough of Camden to ensure our densely planted rooftop garden serves as a habitat that increases local biodiversity, as well as affording beautiful views of the capital.
Advancing the frontiers of AI
We’re excited to begin moving our teams into this inspiring and collaborative space. I see this spectacular building as more than an office — it is a monument to science and intelligence. Our multi-disciplinary teams will work together here to achieve the next world-changing breakthroughs like AlphaGo, pioneering the path towards artificial general intelligence to build a better future for the benefit of everyone.