Computer Science > Robotics
Title:SIMPLE: Simulation-Based Policy Learning and Evaluation for Humanoid Loco-manipulation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Humanoid foundation models are advancing faster than we can evaluate them. While real-world testing is expensive and difficult to reproduce, existing simulation benchmarks focus primarily on table-top or wheeled robots. A scalable and reproducible benchmark for whole-body humanoid loco-manipulation remains an open problem. To this end, we present SIMPLE, a unified simulation testbed for humanoid policy learning and evaluation. SIMPLE couples the accurate contact-rich dynamics of MuJoCo with the photorealistic rendering of IsaacSim. It provides a large-scale environment comprising 60 diverse whole-body tasks, 50 indoor scenes, and over 1,000 object assets. To facilitate scalable data collection, the framework integrates two data generation pipelines: automated trajectory generation via motion planning and a low-latency VR teleoperation interface. We further integrate and benchmark mainstream humanoid policies at scale in SIMPLE, including lightweight imitation networks, large vision-language-action (VLA) models, and recent world action models (WAMs). Our experiments reveal a strong correlation between policy performance in simulation and the real world. Furthermore, we demonstrate that policies trained on data collected in SIMPLE can be transferred zero-shot to physical humanoid robots under similar settings, providing a robust and reproducible foundation for humanoid robotics research.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.