Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:Scaling Participation in Modular AI Systems
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Humanity is a mosaic of multifaceted talents and needs, and any truly intelligent AI must reflect that richness. Yet the LLMs used by all are built by the few -- a centralized market of monolithic AI models structurally ill-suited to capture the diversity of human knowledge, reasoning, and values. Here we introduce scaling participation, a new paradigm in which modular AI systems are built from the bottom up through the contributions of diverse stakeholders. Participants contribute small models trained on their own interests and priorities; these models then collaborate in modular frameworks as compositional AI systems. Participatory AI systems outperform monolithic LLMs by up to 15.4% across 15 tasks, such as reasoning and factuality, surpassing models larger than all contributed components combined. Further experiments show that participatory AI systems benefit from contributor diversity, substantially improve on each contributor's original priorities, and exhibit emergent capabilities that allow them to solve over 15% of problems where all individual models fail. Scaling participation provides a technical foundation for transitioning from the monolithic status quo toward an open, bottom-up, and collaborative AI future.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.