As my fellow pet parents will know, it’s amazing how quickly even the tiniest of dogs can demolish their toys and treat stash. We love and spoil them nonetheless. When you subscribe to BarkBox a fresh batch of cleverly themed treats and toys arrives at your doorstep. The costs of pet ownership can stack up quickly, especially if you’re buying your pooch a random gift box that goes well beyond the essentials. That’s why we have Barkbox promo codes and discount options ready to go for you.
Barkbox Promo: Enjoy a Free Toy for a Year at Barkbox
When your monthly Barkbox arrives, it’s like Christmas morning for your dogs. I watch as my two dogs, Rosi and Randy, shake their little Chihuahua mix bodies with barely restrained excitement. They’re never gentle on their toys but the stimulation that comes from textures and chewing is good for their little brains. With Barkbox you get a steady supply of two unique toys and two bags of all-natural treats every month. If you want to see how your dogs react, this Barkbox coupon is good for new Barkbox subscription customers and adds an additional toy in your box every month for a year.
Save 50% on Your First Barkbox Food Subscription With a Barkbox Coupon Code
Another reason why Barkbox is the best dog subscription box is how easy the company makes it to keep your pantry stocked with your dog’s food. Use this Barkbox coupon to save 50% off your first Barkbox food subscription, so you won’t have to end up running out to the grocery store in the middle of the night when your scooper scrapes across the bottom of an empty kibble bin. Use Barbox promo code Belly50 to get 50% off now.
Fly Travel Stress-Free With Your Dog and Get $300 Off BARK Air Flights
If you live in a Barkbox flight hub destination, please know I am insanely jealous of you. It’s no secret that flying is stressful and can be very dangerous for pets, especially if they have to ride in a cargo hold. Barkbox makes them the VIP with BARK Air, letting them ride in the cabin with you and get doted on, so things are a lot less scary. This is another perk of having a BarkBox subscription, with the opportunity to save $300 off BARK Air Flights.
Support Your Dog’s Dental Health and Get $10 Off With a Barkbox Coupon
Dental health is crucial for dogs, as it can prevent disease not just in their mouths, but their vital organs. Don’t forget to schedule your yearly cleaning with your vet, but in the meantime, use this BarkBox discount code to get $10 off a special BarkBox Dental kit.
Get an Extra Premium Toy in Every BarkBox With the Extra Toy Club
For having such tiny mouths, my dogs can gnaw through toys with surprising speed. If you’re also buried in a pile of shredded fluff and squeakers from disemboweled toys, the Extra Toy Club can help. This subscription includes dog toys for aggressive chewers of all ages, breeds, and sizes, offering extra durable toys meant to last longer. So far, so good at my house. To upgrade to this subscription box, it’s an extra $9 per month.
Get Exclusive BarkBox Discounts: Join the Email List
If you assume that the punchy branding and witty lingo extend to Barkbox’s email subscribers and not just the box subscription, you’d be correct. As a bonus, you can get exclusive BarkBox discount codes when you sign up to receive these emails. Who also doesn’t love a furry face and reminder of their pet in between work subject lines and bill payment reminders, too?
Don’t Miss Barkbox Monthly Themes
If your pup tires easily, or you’re a pet influencer who wants to change up content on a regular basis, Barkbox has monthly themed boxes to make sure you and your pup are up on the trends, and never get bored of their old toys and treats. Barkbox has themed boxes for holidays like Thanksgiving and Halloween, as well as cute topical themes like ocean exploration, movie night, Spongebob themed dog toys, aliens, Italy, and more.