Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Benchmarking Audio Deepfake Detection Robustness in Real-world Communication Scenarios
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Existing Audio Deepfake Detection (ADD) systems often struggle to generalise effectively due to the significantly degraded audio quality caused by audio codec compression and channel transmission effects in real-world communication scenarios. To address this challenge, we developed a rigorous benchmark to evaluate the performance of the ADD system under such scenarios. We introduced ADD-C, a new test dataset to evaluate the robustness of ADD systems under diverse communication conditions, including different combinations of audio codecs for compression and packet loss rates. Benchmarking three baseline ADD models on the ADD-C dataset demonstrated a significant decline in robustness under such conditions. A novel Data Augmentation (DA) strategy was proposed to improve the robustness of ADD systems. Experimental results demonstrated that the proposed approach significantly enhances the performance of ADD systems on the proposed ADD-C dataset. Our benchmark can assist future efforts towards building practical and robustly generalisable ADD systems.
Submission history
From: Haohan Shi [view email][v1] Wed, 16 Apr 2025 18:44:05 UTC (2,275 KB)
[v2] Tue, 3 Jun 2025 20:05:49 UTC (1,683 KB)
[v3] Mon, 11 May 2026 15:35:12 UTC (1,683 KB)
[v4] Thu, 11 Jun 2026 10:49:12 UTC (1,683 KB)
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.