Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge. That purple category is a tough one, where you must hunt for hidden words inside of other words. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Tucked-away area.
Green group hint: Sass, but make it anatomy.
Blue group hint: Think Zeus.
Purple group hint: The beginning of each word has a connection.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Alcove.
Green group: Bodily words for attitude.
Blue group: Figures in Greek myth.
Purple group: Starting with synonyms for "ilk."
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is alcove. The four answers are cavity, niche, nook and recess.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is bodily words for attitude. The four answers are cheek, lip, mouth and nerve.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is figures in Greek myth. The four answers are Calliope, Echo, Iris and Nemesis.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is starting with synonyms for "ilk." The four answers are classic, Kindle, sortie and typeface.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.