Summer heat often strains power grids, leading to brownouts and blackouts. This is a particular problem for refrigerators, which come loaded with food and perishables that can go bad in a matter of hours. Bluetti's FridgePower is an ultraslim portable power station that's designed to connect exclusively to your fridge to keep it running during outages.
"While portable power stations can run a fridge, they often require manual intervention during a crisis," said James Ray, spokesperson for Bluetti, in a press release about an earlier Kickstarter campaign. "We engineered FridgePower to eliminate that friction -- providing a specialized, automatic backup that stays ready 24/7 so homeowners don't have to lift a finger when the lights go out."
We've seen a similar idea from BioLite back during CES 2025, featuring a slim, portable power station that fits behind the fridge for backup power. The FridgePower takes a slightly different approach; it can fit just as easily on top of your fridge as behind it, since it measures just 2.95 inches at its thickest point. It also comes with a magnetic screen that snaps directly onto your fridge, making it easy to check charging and battery status.
Installation is also quite easy. I'm currently testing a model, and the FridgePower is plug-and-play with your existing kitchen outlet and doesn't require any kind of installation. It operates quietly at 30 decibels and comes with a LiFePO₄ battery rated for over 4,000 cycles.
It's available in various configurations with different add-ons, but the standalone unit has 2,016 watt-hours or 1,800 watts. According to Bluetti, a single unit provides up to 21.6 hours of runtime for a standard refrigerator, which is just a bit less than a day's outage. If you need more juice, it can scale up to 8kWh with three BlueCell 200 expansion batteries, giving you a total of four days of use. But at that point, you might want to start considering whole-home backup options.
To accommodate the needs of fridges and freezers, the Bluetti FridgePower includes an uninterrupted power supply. It automatically switches to battery power within 10 milliseconds of a power outage without you needing to do anything manually, which is similar to what you get from more dedicated systems.
The FridgePower also supports the Bluetti app, letting you manage four intelligent UPS modes: Standard, PV Priority, TOU and Customized. PV Priority stands for photovoltaic priority and prioritizes solar charging when connected. TOU stands for time-of-use and is designed to automatically manage charging for customers on time-of-use electricity rate plans.
It'll also push Extreme Weather Alerts to your phone to keep you informed about upcoming outage risks.
Price and availability
The FridgePower launches at $849, or 35% off its usual $1,299 price as part of an early June Prime Day offer. It also comes with a BlueCell 200 expansion battery bundle for $1,598which is 36% off its usual price of $2,498.