Featured in this article
When you own an iPad, your choices of accessories are nearly endless. There's a wealth of cases, cables, adapters, styli, keyboards, and stands out there to trick out your slate. But how do you pick which ones to buy? I've spent years filling a corner of my tiny New York apartment with boxes of gear to find the best iPad accessories. Whether you’re a longtime iPad owner or recently picked one up after perusing our Best iPad guide, there's something here for you.
Check out our many other buying guides, including the Best iPhones, Best iPhone 16 Cases, Best MagSafe Accessories, Best Apple 3-in-1 Chargers, Best Tablets, and Best Drawing Apps.
Updated June 2026: I've added the Twelve South Curve Mini and removed some older products.
Wait. Which iPad Do You Own?
There are so many iPads out there, it can be hard to identify the exact model you own, and therefore know which accessories are compatible. Do you have the iPad Pro from 2017 with the 10.5-inch screen? Or the 9.7-inch one from 2016? It doesn't help that Apple avoids the sequential naming structure it uses for the iPhone. But no matter.
Here's how to find your model:
- Look at the back of your iPad. Etched on the back cover, near where it says "Designed by Apple in California," should be a model number starting with the letter A.
- Head to this website from Apple. Look for your corresponding model number, and that's it! You found your iPad model. (Pro tip: Use your browser's "Find in Page" function to type in your model number and locate it quickly.)
Accessory makers usually indicate what iPad a case, folio, or keyboard cover is designed to work with. Most of our picks below are for the newest hardware, but they're often also available for older iPads. Just search for the product name and your iPad model.
If you see a retailer mentioning a specific generation or chipset, this is Apple's current lineup:
- iPad: 11th generation (A16, 2025)
- iPad Mini: 7th generation (A17 Pro, 2024)
- iPad Air 11-inch: 7th generation (M4, 2026)
- iPad Air 13-inch: 2nd generation (M5, 2026)
- iPad Pro 11-inch: 5th generation (M5, 2025)
- iPad Pro 13-inch: 7th generation (M5, 2025)
Other iPad Accessories We Like
iPad accessories are endless. Here are some other options that are perfectly fine, though some have issues that knock them down a rung.
Zagg Pro Keys 2 Keyboard Case for $150: Zagg's case (7/10, WIRED Review) isn't as elegant as Logitech's system, but you can connect it via Bluetooth to two different devices. That means you'll need to recharge the keyboard case via USB-C. It's more protective, thanks to the folio cover, and it's a detachable system with a case that’s separate from the slate. But it's also a lot bulkier. The second-generation version doesn't come with a trackpad either, so you'll have to supply your own mouse. This one is only available for the iPad Pro (M4), but you can still purchase the first-gen version for the ninth-gen iPad, iPad Air (including the 11-inch iPad Air with M2), and 11-inch iPad Pro, as well as the 12.9-inch iPad Pro.
ESR Rebound Case for $120: When I was gifted the iPad Pro (M4) for Christmas, I wanted an accessory that would allow me to use it as my daily driver instead of my MacBook. But I'm not a fan of the current options out there—the Magic Keyboard doesn't come with a case (leaving your iPad exposed whenever you want to use it as a standard tablet), and the Logitech Combo is top-heavy (especially on your lap). I decided to give the ESR Rebound case a chance and haven't looked back. It has a case that protects your iPad and magnetically attaches to a keyboard case, plus a clasp that keeps your Apple Pencil secure. The purple color is fun too, but it also comes in black, white, and blue.—Louryn Strampe
Logitech MX Mechanical Mini for $160: This keyboard is compact and has satisfyingly clicky keys, plus they're backlit. It recharges via USB-C, but I've only had to plug it in once every few months. It connects either via Bluetooth or a USB-A dongle (or with the included USB-C cable), and the connection never fails.
Logitech Crayon Stylus for $70: Apple Pencil not striking your fancy? This Logitech Crayon is a slightly more affordable option, It's especially great for kids because it's thicker yet maintains great palm rejection, decent (but not identical) pressure sensitivity, and low latency. Logitech has updated it with USB-C support, so now you can truly ditch that Lightning cable.
Satechi USB-C Hybrid With SSD Enclosure for $90: Satechi's four-port hub is a little too large, considering the number of ports you get, but there's a good reason for that. Pop off the aluminum cover and you'll find a slot for an M.2 SATA solid-state storage drive (SSD) slot. That means access to an external SSD, along with two USB-A jacks, one 100-watt USB-C pass-through charging port, and a 4K HDMI at the same time. I did not have an M.2 SATA drive to test, but this 1-terabyte card should work. Just know that Satechi's hub does not support NVMe M.2 cards.
Paperlike Screen Protector for $50: This screen cover goes over your iPad's screen to mimic the texture and friction of sketching on paper. Former WIRED reviewer Jaina Grey said the film is harder to apply than a typical screen protector (make sure you clean your iPad's screen thoroughly beforehand). But when you're done, it adds enough resistance that you'll find it hard to go back to drawing on glass.
Mageasy CoverBuddy Case (iPad Pro) for $70: Mageasy's case is compatible with Apple's Magic Keyboard case and is a great option if you want extra protection for your iPad without adding too much bulk. Like the ESR Rebound case, you can attach and detach it from the Magic Keyboard case without losing out on the extra protection. It comes with a slot for the Apple Pencil Pro or the USB-C version. There's also the CoverBuddy Lite for the iPad Air (M2).
OtterBox Defender Series Rugged Case for $42: Want a more protective case? Get the OtterBox Defender. It's available for the previous-gen iPad, 10th-gen iPad, iPad Mini, iPad Air, and iPad Pro models. There's a built-in screen protector and covers for the charging port, volume rockers, and Apple Pencil. There’s also an outer shell with a kickstand you can clip on if you want to prop up the iPad. It’s far too clunky for my personal use, but you'll be hard-pressed to find more protection for your slate.
Apple Smart Folio for $80: These slim cases and covers from Apple do the job just fine and can even convert into kickstands to prop up your tablet. They're also some of the best options for the iPad Mini.
Anker USB-C to Ethernet Adapter for $26: Most people won't need an Ethernet port on an iPad, but maybe you're taking a stab at some cloud gaming on your tablet. If so, you'll need the fastest speeds you can get so your games appear in the highest quality possible. This simple, aluminum USB-C to Ethernet dongle delivered around 700 Mbps download speeds on the iPad Pro in my home, which is what my desktop PC usually hits.
Apple Magic Keyboard (2nd-gen) for $349: This keyboard is even more expensive than the first-gen. It's also only compatible with the iPad Pro (M4). But the upgrades are really nice. There's a larger trackpad, an aluminum palm rest, and a row of Function keys. It's also thinner and lighter, which is ideal seeing as how the same applies to the latest iPad Pro. However, as with its predecessor, this case is still a little top-heavy.
SaharaCase Folio Case for $30: We tested this case for the iPad Mini, but you can also get it for the ninth-gen iPad and iPad Pro. On the outside is an automatic sleep/wake cover that doubles as a kickstand to prop up the iPad. There’s a really nice marble pattern on the front and back that makes it stand out. You can also stow the Apple Pencil on the inside, so you don't have to worry about it falling off.
Speck Balance Folio Case for $50: This case features built-in grooves for various adjustable angles, as well as a removable camera cover. There’s a latch in place of a magnetic cover and the Apple Pencil slot sits on the outside. It's not the most stylish, but it's protective and lightweight. The grooves are also great for those who use their iPads to watch content. It's available for the Air, 11-inch Pro, 12.9-inch Pro, and the ninth- and 10th-gen iPad.
Casetify Selfie by Bonnie Lu Ultra Impact Folio Case for $74: If you're looking for an iPad case that offers great protection and has adorable prints to choose from, look no further than Casetify's lineup. We've been obsessed with this Selfie by Bonnie Lu case for a few months now—it packs extra protection on all four corners of the device and can withstand drops up to 4 feet, plus the artwork is super cute. It has grooves on the front cover, too, allowing you to adjust the angle of the iPad. We tested this case for the iPad Air, but you can also get it for the 10th-gen iPad, iPad Mini, and iPad Pro (both models).
Paperlike Charcoal Folio Case for $65: Designed to feel like a sketchbook, the Folio Case has a polyester fabric cover that's super high-quality and lightweight. It can also be used to prop up your iPad at two different levels. This case doesn't come with an Apple Pencil slot, but the large flap closure keeps it from falling out. Although we only tested the Folio Case with the iPad Air, it's also available for iPad Pro (both models).
Harbor London Magnetic Envelope Sleeve for $159: If the price doesn't put you off, this is a rather elegant way to protect your iPad. There's full-grain leather on one side and 100 percent wool felt on the other (and inside). It feels exquisite. It's roomy enough to fit an iPad with a case on it, and it's available for several generations of the base model slate, including the 10th-gen iPad, the iPad Air, and the iPad Pro. There's a little leather loop to carry your Apple Pencil for extra security. The sleeve has a slot on one side to access the USB-C charging port, but more unique is its ability to double as a stand. It's not the most versatile stand—you only really get one angle—but it did the job on my lap, which is an impressive feat for such a floppy item.
Logitech Keys-To-Go 2 Tablet Keyboard for $80: If you don't want a keyboard case, this is a solid alternative. It's a compact, lightweight, and slim external keyboard that comes with a built-in protective cover. The low-profile scissor keys feel nice to type on, and there's a convenient shortcut row for functions like volume, screen brightness, emoji, and more. When using it, you're supposed to flip the cover behind the keyboard—which gives it height for a more comfortable experience. Because the cover has a soft texture, however, it adds bounce when typing. I'm not a huge fan of it, but others might not be as bothered. It's also a bit expensive compared to other options.
Not Recommended
These are the iPad accessories we suggest avoiding.
Zagg Pro Stylus 2 for $80: The Zagg Pro Stylus 2 is cute and all, especially in the Yellow No. 2 design, but at $80, you may as well buy the second-gen Apple Pencil or Apple Pencil Pro since they often dip in price. With no support for pressure sensitivity, you also have to tilt the stylus to achieve thick or thin lines, but it doesn't feel seamless.
Moft Snap Float Folio for $70: Honestly, the idea behind this case is smart, but it's just a little too annoying to use. It's slim and barely feels protective, and you can fold it in different ways to prop up your iPad at four angles—kind of like origami. It's difficult to remember the exact methods for some of these modes at first, but I got used to them, though I had to readjust it on the iPad too many times.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.