Logitech's new $80 Mobi Fold is conceptually quite appealing. This tiny 2.8-ounce travel mouse reminds me of the mini flip phones of yesteryear, folding up into a small square that's less than an inch thick and pocket-friendly. Unfold it, and you have a fully functional, rechargeable mouse that works on any surface and offers very good performance along with a relatively strong set of features. But it has one drawback that may affect some hands more than others.
To me, anyway, its ergonomics feel a little cramped. In my testing, I kept finding myself adjusting my hand on the Mobi Fold, trying to strike a comfortable balance between where my fingers sat on the mouse and where my wrist rested. (I have medium-sized hands, according to my glove size.)
The ergonomics certainly aren't terrible and may be fine for those with smaller hands. But if you're used to Logitech's flagship MX Master 4 ($120) or its compact, travel-friendly MX Anywhere 3S mice, the Mobi Fold feels like a downgrade in the ergonomics department.
Despite that sentiment, I do think using the Mobi Fold is preferable to using your notebook's trackpad. Logitech says it reduces muscle strain by 22% compared to a trackpad, and that number does seem about right. It's also an ambidextrous mouse, so lefties don't have to feel discriminated against.
Logitech's Arc mouse with less of an arc
In many ways, this is Logitech's answer to Microsoft's similarly priced Arc mouse, which is designed for use with Microsoft's Surface tablets and laptops. The 2.9-ounce Arc folds flat but not in half. However, it does have more of a hump or curve that offers a little more support for your palm. I found it slightly more comfortable overall.
Small ergonomic gripes aside, the Mobi Fold is a likable and capable travel mouse, with a 4,000-dots-per-inch optical sensor and Logitech's quiet-clicks technology so you don't annoy people sitting near you in public places. Wrapped in a dust-resistant silicone sleeve, it seems durable; Logitech says it's "drop-tested" and its hinge can withstand 15 years of daily use, based on its tests. It does become a bit of a fidget toy, but it recognizes when it's being folded to avoid any accidental clicks.
There's no scroll wheel per se. However, the mouse is equipped with a touch panel that features Logitech's Adaptive Touch Scrolling, which is zippy and pretty smooth, but I certainly prefer the physical scroll wheels on the MX Master 4 and MX Anywhere 3S. It's also worth noting that there are two buttons on the touch panel that can be customized in the Logi Options Plus app to trigger shortcuts, such as switching applications or taking screenshots.
Easy on and off
I liked that once you pair the Mobi, you just have to unfold it to turn it on, and it automatically connects to a device. Fold it shut, and it automatically turns off to preserve battery life. Logitech says a 1-minute charge via USB-C gets you 22 hours of use, and up to 30 days on a full charge. The battery does appear to be replaceable, which is nice, considering it won't last the 15 years the hinge is rated for.
Like many of Logitech's mice, the Mobi Fold supports Windows, MacOS, ChromeOS, Android and iPadOS, and can connect to up to three devices over Bluetooth, with a button on the bottom of the mouse that allows you to toggle between the devices. (The Mobi Fold for Business includes a USB Logi Bolt wireless receiver that you can connect to instead of using Bluetooth.) It's also Logitech's first input device to offer Fast Pair for Google users and be Fast Pair-certified.
Logitech Mobi Fold final thoughts
While its ergonomics aren't great, the Mobi Fold, which comes in four color options -- black, lilac, off-white and sand -- is a nifty little travel mouse with an eye-catching design that takes up little room in your bag, or even a pants pocket. It beats using the trackpad on your laptop.
You can argue that it's a little expensive at $80, particularly when you can pick up the arguably superior MX Anywhere 3S for $10 more. But in terms of design and build quality, it's on par with Microsoft's Arc mouse, so you can see why it's priced where it is.
As an incentive to buy at launch, Logitech is throwing in a Mobi Fold Pouch (a $23 value) for free. For those on the fence, maybe later this year we'll see some discounts (around $15) similar to what we're currently seeing on the $80 Keys-To-Go 2, Logitech's ultraportable keyboard equivalent to the Mobi Fold. But after the price drops a bit, you might not get that protective pouch as part of the deal.