Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Mitigating Spurious Correlations with Memorization-Guided Dataset De-Biasing
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Real-world datasets often contain spurious correlations that are not causally related to the target label. When such correlations dominate the majority of training samples, models tend to rely on them, leading to misclassification of minority samples that do not exhibit the same spurious patterns. While a potential approach is to select subsets of data to better represent the minority samples, this may require access to group labels, which are typically unknown. Furthermore, as we demonstrate, widely used sample scoring functions in the invariant subset or coreset selection literature largely depend on spurious features and therefore fail to accurately capture the importance or difficulty of core, causally relevant features. Accordingly, we propose to mitigate spurious correlations by developing a two-stage sample scoring function that disentangles the learning dynamics of core and spurious features and evaluates their difficulty separately. Based on our proposed metric, we introduce a new algorithm to find and prioritize informative samples both with and without spurious correlations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that a standard ERM model trained on our selected samples achieves superior performance compared to state-of-the-art debiasing techniques, while requiring as little as 10\% of the original training data.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.