Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:GRAG: Generic Response-Augmented Generation Framework for Personalized Conversational Systems
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Deploying highly capable personalized conversational agents in resource-constrained or privacy-sensitive environments remains a significant challenge. We identify a fundamental bottleneck in the existing approaches: current training paradigms treat personalization and grounding as a single monolithic learning problem. Under these paradigms, language models are forced to simultaneously address what to say (content grounding) and how to say it in a user-specific way (personalization), which introduces significant computational and optimization challenges. Consequently, contextual grounding is often sacrificed for persona adherence, or vice versa, resulting in responses that are either weakly grounded in the conversational history or insufficiently personalized. In this work, we propose the Generic Response-Augmented Generation (GRAG) framework that decouples these competing objectives by leveraging offline, generic responses from high-capacity, general-purpose LLMs as a semantic and structural scaffold to guide the fine-tuning of smaller, task-specialized models seamlessly in resource-limited environments. By decoupling the content grounding from personalization, GRAG allows the model to focus exclusively on persona injection while remaining firmly anchored to the conversational context. We instantiate the GRAG in two post- and pre-fusion-based architectural variants and evaluate them on multiple benchmark conversational datasets that cover diverse personalization structures. Our results demonstrate that GRAG significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods that do not use auxiliary scaffolding, yielding up to 47% improvements in ROUGE-2 and 36% in BLEU scores. Ultimately, GRAG offers a generalizable blueprint for building grounding-aware personalized conversational systems in resource-limited environments.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.