Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Solving Inverse Problems with Flow-based Models via Model Predictive Control
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Flow-based generative models provide strong unconditional priors for inverse problems, but guiding their dynamics for conditional generation remains challenging. Recent work casts training-free conditional generation in flow models as an optimal control problem; however, solving the resulting trajectory optimisation is computationally and memory intensive, requiring differentiation through the flow dynamics or adjoint solves. We propose MPC-Flow, a model predictive control framework that formulates inverse problem solving with flow-based generative models as a sequence of control sub-problems, enabling practical optimal control-based guidance at inference time. We provide theoretical analysis linking MPC-Flow to the underlying optimal control objective and show how different algorithmic choices yield a spectrum of guidance algorithms, including regimes that avoid backpropagation through the generative model trajectory. We evaluate MPC-Flow on benchmark image restoration tasks, spanning linear and non-linear settings such as in-painting, deblurring, and super-resolution, and demonstrate strong performance and scalability to massive state-of-the-art architectures via training-free guidance of FLUX.2 (32B) in a quantised setting on consumer hardware.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.