NVIDIA and LG Group are building an AI factory to accelerate LG Group’s next wave of AI-driven businesses, spanning robotics, autonomous driving, data center technologies and GPU cloud services.
The AI factory will provide LG Group with accelerated computing infrastructure to train, simulate, validate and deploy AI-based applications across its key businesses.
The collaboration brings together NVIDIA’s full-stack, end-to-end AI factory platform with LG Group’s global leadership in consumer electronics, robotics, mobility components, smart spaces and data center technologies.
Together, the companies are connecting AI model development, physical AI data generation, robot simulation and training, edge deployment and factory-scale digital twins into a unified workflow for building physical AI systems.
Advancing Physical AI and Robotics
The combination of LG’s production technology data and know-how from global manufacturing sites with NVIDIA’s AI infrastructure and digital twin technologies will help enhance AI-driven manufacturing AI competitiveness. The two companies will collaborate to build an autonomous manufacturing ecosystem in which the entire process — from raw material procurement to production, logistics and customer delivery — is connected in real time through data and AI, and establish it as a new global smart factory standard.
LG Electronics is developing home-based robots like CLoiD to help with a wide range of indoor household tasks, enhancing everyday convenience and improving quality of life.
By integrating the NVIDIA Isaac Sim and NVIDIA Isaac Lab open robotics frameworks into their development workflows, LG can simulate, train and validate these home cobots in physically accurate virtual environments before deployment.
The company is exploring using the NVIDIA Isaac GR00T open, reasoning vision action language model for both its home robots and modular robotics platforms. The GR00T model will provide LG robots humanlike reasoning and the ability to execute complex tasks. NVIDIA and LG Electronics also plan to jointly develop reference robots, positioning LG’s robots as part of the NVIDIA Isaac GR00T ecosystem.
To help overcome the training data challenge for robotics, LG Electronics is developing a physical AI data factory poised to help Korean and global companies accelerate physical AI projects. By turning compute into data, LG will be providing high-quality training data for robotics and industrial AI projects, using NVIDIA Cosmos world foundation models for synthetic data generation and augmentation.
LG Innotek, harnessing its world-class optical expertise, plans to provide state-of-the-art robotics components, including sensing solutions, specifically optimized for NVIDIA’s development environments and GPU architecture.
LG CNS is building an ecosystem that enables anyone to easily adopt AI robots in manufacturing and logistics sites. By integrating NVIDIA’s robotics technologies including Isaac open robotics frameworks, NVIDIA Cosmos open world models and Isaac GR00T robotic foundation models into its PhysicalWorks industrial robot platform, the company is accelerating the AI transformation of logistics and manufacturing floors.
Building an NVIDIA DSX-Aligned AI Factory Infrastructure
The two companies will also expand cooperation in the field of next-generation AI factories, which will support the AI era.
Beyond its certification cooperation with NVIDIA on cooling solutions for AI factory thermal management — including cooling distribution units (CDUs) and cold plates — LG Electronics is further elevating its AI factory capabilities through technical collaboration on prefabricated modular design technologies. This initiative aligns with the NVIDIA DSX AI factory platform, enabling the rapid deployment of scalable, high-performance supercomputing infrastructure.
These technologies include CDUs, cold plates and prefab modular design capabilities to help address the power, thermal and deployment requirements of next-generation liquid-cooled AI factories.
In collaboration with LG Electronics and LG Energy Solution, LG Uplus — a telecommunications provider under LG Corp. — plans to build scalable, power-efficient AI factories based on NVIDIA DSX. The effort is expected to combine NVIDIA accelerated computing and AI factory reference architectures with LG’s infrastructure, energy and telecommunications capabilities to support future AI cloud and GPU service opportunities.
LG CNS plans to build scalable, power-efficient, high-performance AI factories powered by NVIDIA GPUs based on NVIDIA DSX.
LG Uplus plans to build a large-scale AI data center capable of accommodating the latest NVIDIA GPUs.
LG Energy Solution plans to collaborate with NVIDIA on emerging 800 volt-direct-current data center energy solutions, in alignment with NVIDIA’s BESS Self-Qualification guidelines, to keep pace with next-generation GPUs.
Accelerating Autonomous Driving and Mobility AI
In mobility, LG Electronics works with NVIDIA to align its advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) and in-vehicle AI systems with the NVIDIA DRIVE platform.
The collaboration will focus on aligning sensor, compute and software architectures with the NVIDIA DRIVE Hyperion architecture, supporting LG Electronics’ roadmap for autonomous driving, ADAS and software-defined vehicles.
LG Electronics also plans to use NVIDIA DRIVE AGX accelerated compute for its future mobility applications, including AI-powered cockpits and edge AI processing. Through this work, LG Electronics aims to strengthen its automotive electronics portfolio and accelerate the development of AI-driven mobility solutions for global manufacturers.
LG Innotek is rapidly cementing its leadership in the autonomous driving market, using its core portfolio of world-class sensing, connectivity and lighting solutions. LG Innotek plans to collaborate with NVIDIA on next-generation components engineered specifically for NVIDIA architecture.
Advancing Sovereign AI With EXAONE
NVIDIA and LG AI Research are collaborating to advance EXAONE, one of Korea’s leading sovereign AI models and an open model family available to developers, enterprises and researchers.
LG AI Research used NVIDIA Blackwell GPUs, NVIDIA NeMo framework and NVIDIA Nemotron open datasets to support EXAONE model development, as well as NVIDIA TensorRT-LLM software to build high-performance inference engines for optimized deployment.
LG Group is exploring broader adoption of EXAONE and agentic AI technologies across its businesses through platforms such as ChatEXAONE — LG Group’s EXAONE-based enterprise chatbot service. NVIDIA will help power LG AI Research’s sovereign AI models, so LG Group can accelerate enterprise AI transformation, software-defined operations and productivity across its business portfolio.
Learn more about the NVIDIA DSX platform.
Featured image courtesy of LG Group.