Once the purview of crime labs and TV shows, DNA tests have instead become common gifts for birthdays, holidays and special occasions like Mother's Day and Father's Day. Quick tests like 23andMe and AncestryDNA have made the process of learning more about your family history easier, cheaper and faster than ever.
But in her new book, The Psychology of Genealogy, psychologist Susan Moore warns that you should consider all the risks before undergoing a test.
"Should you give DNA kits as gifts? It can be fun; it can be risky," Moore said.
Why you should exercise caution
Beyond the safety concerns of a company having your DNA on file with the potential of data breaches and privacy concerns, emotional fallout can be an unexpected -- yet not uncommon -- result of these DNA tests. While genetic testing promises answers and connection, those findings can upend long-held beliefs about your identity and family.
With over 30 million users and a multibillion-dollar industry, surprising matches and results are common. Misattributed paternity, donor-conception discoveries, late-found adoptions and unknown family members have all emerged from growing databases. For people unprepared for these outcomes, the psychological effects can be severe, according to Moore.
Moore calls it "identity disruption" when new genetic information can undermine a person's sense of self and belonging. She says some integrate the news and move on, while others face betrayal, mistrust and grief.
Why do people test anyway?
There are many practical, real risks when it comes to DNA testing. So why do millions of people still purchase them and send in their swabs?
Moore points to a few basic drives, such as curiosity, a need for rootedness and the intellectual thrill of uncovering family lore as to why people still undergo genetic tests. Genealogy can bring joy when people find long-lost relatives or overcome research barriers. Yet, curiosity often meets hard, unexpected truths.
"DNA gives you some new and interesting clues to your family tree structure, but the hard work of making sense of those clues must still be done," Moore said.
If you're still interested in pursuing genetic testing anyway, Moore offers some simple advice: Test only if you want to explore ancestry and are ready to learn how to interpret results and contact matches ethically. Do not gift a kit without asking first, and make sure recipients are emotionally prepared and aware of privacy risks.