Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:Evaluating Hallucinations in Domain-Adapted Large Language Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:This study investigates the phenomenon of hallucinations in domain-adapted Large Language Models (LLMs), focusing on the fine-tuning of the Llama-2 model with the Lamini dataset. Hallucinations, or the generation of nonsensical or unfaithful content by LLMs, pose a significant challenge, especially when these models are fine-tuned with domain-specific data. Our methodology involves a series of experiments testing memorization, recall, and reasoning capabilities of the fine-tuned LLM, comparing its performance on novel question-answer pairs and domain-specific information. We found that while the model shows proficiency in tasks similar to its training data, its capability to accurately reason about and recall new domain-specific information remains limited, leading to instances of hallucination. The model demonstrates a tendency to provide correct answers with extra information, suggesting an inclination toward over-generation. These results suggest important limitations of fine-tuning-only approaches for mitigating hallucinations when adapting LLMs to specialized domains and underscore the need for more robust methods in adapting LLMs to specialized domains. The study also provides insights into the varying performance of LLMs on different types of information, revealing a comparative weakness in handling domain-specific queries.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.