Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Is Our Benchmark Enough? An Analysis of Continual Learning for MLLMs
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Continual adaptation is essential for multimodal large language models (MLLMs) deployed across evolving domains, but the state-of-the-art MR-LoRA method highly relies on the assumption that a MLLM-based router is necessary to process complex multimodal inputs. This paper revisits this claim on the MLLM-CL benchmark and argues for two claims. \textbf{First}, routing does not require an MLLM: a simple training-free, replay-free ptotypical routing method (\textsc{RePRo}), uses frozen pretrained features and task prototypes to match the MLLM-based router of MR-LoRA at far lower computational cost. \textbf{Second}, shared experts do not improve continual learning for MLLMs, despite their theoretical appeal. We show that these findings arise from two structural limitations of MLLM-CL: (1) its tasks are \textbf{highly separable} in representation space, and (2) its fixed task order makes conclusions \textbf{sensitive to a single curriculum} rather than robust across diverse continual-learning trajectories. As a result, the benchmark primarily rewards learning in isolation rather than genuine continual transfer. This motivates a new design for future benchmarks of continual MLLM learning, with overlapping task manifolds, multiple task orders, fine-grained domain shifts, and evaluation protocols that reward forward transfer as well as retention.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.