Computer Science > Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Title:Weight Adaptation for Improving Parallel Performance of Adaptive Stochastic Natural Gradient
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Probabilistic model-based evolutionary algorithms are promising for black-box optimization. Specifically, the adaptive stochastic natural gradient (ASNG) adaptively updates its learning rate, a typical hyperparameter in probabilistic model-based evolutionary algorithms, thereby realizing efficient and robust optimization. Although weight parameters are common hyperparameters, with the increasing demand for parallel evaluation of time-consuming tasks, it remains unclear how to set suitable weights for larger population sizes. In this paper, we propose Weight Adaptation ASNG (WA-ASNG), which incorporates a weight adaptation mechanism into ASNG. We calculated the estimated signal of the update direction from the accumulations of the natural gradient. Then, to maximize the signal, WA-ASNG adaptively updates its weight parameters by a gradient ascent over the optimization. While the learning rate adaptation plays a role in satisfying a sufficient condition for monotonic improvement of the expected objective value, the mechanism of weight adaptation is intended to maximize this improvement. The experimental results demonstrate that WA-ASNG outperforms PBIL and ASNG across various settings with population sizes ranging from 25 to 100 for binary optimization problems. Furthermore, WA-ASNG can perform efficiently in the presence of strong noise. Our code is available at this https URL .
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.