Computer Science > Robotics
Title:WT-UMI: Tactile-based Whole-Body Manipulation via Force-Supervised Contact-Aware Planning
View PDFAbstract:Whole-body humanoid manipulation of bulky, deformable, and shared-load objects requires distributed contact sensing and explicit force regulation, yet most imitation policies treat contact force only implicitly. On the other hand, different demonstration sources provide complementary modalities with inherent trade-offs: human demonstrations capture natural contact forces but not robot-executable actions, while teleoperation directly records robot actions but with less natural force regulation. This paper presents \textbf{WT-UMI}, a wearable whole-body tactile interface worn by human operators or mounted on humanoids, providing accurate observations of tactile images, contact forces, and end-effector poses across both human demonstration and humanoid teleoperation modes. We introduce a force-conditioned target-pose correction module that converts measured human poses into contact-aware robot targets by learning corrections from teleoperation data. To leverage the natural force interaction in human data, we propose a force-supervised planner that predicts end-effector pose chunks and contact-force trajectories. The predicted contact force serves as the reference for a tactile-based admittance controller. Across five contact-rich tasks spanning deformable objects, bulky rigid objects, and human--humanoid collaboration, WT-UMI improves success rate and reduces contact-position tracking error over four policy baselines. Our project page is available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.