Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Improvise, Adapt, Overcome: An On-The-Fly Multifidelity Algorithm for Efficient Machine Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Machine learning has accelerated quantum chemistry but is hindered by the prohibitive cost of generating high fidelity training data. Multifidelity machine learning (MFML) mitigates this overhead by systematically combining abundant low fidelity data with sparse high fidelity data. In spite of its success, standard MFML schemes rely on pre-defined scaling factors to determine sparse data ratio across fidelities, often generating redundant multifidelity data resulting in a loss of efficiency. Here, we introduce an adaptive on-the-fly multifidelity framework for machine learning that autonomously determines training dataset composition. By dynamically querying training samples at each fidelity, the algorithm saturates model accuracy at lower fidelities before moving up to more expensive reference calculations. We benchmark the novel adaptive-MFML across diverse chemical properties including the computational chemistry gold standard coupled cluster energies, and the more chemically challenging excitation energies. In our numerical experiments we show that our adaptive algorithm reduces data generation costs by up to a factor of 30 compared to single fidelity methods and improves upon standard MFML by up to a factor of 5. The mitigation of data redundancy establishes a high-accuracy low-cost pathway for sustainable cost-aware machine learning in quantum chemistry.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.