Computer Science > Robotics
Title:G-MAPP: GPU-accelerated Multi-Agent Planning and Perception for Reactive Motion Generation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Reactive motion generation in unstructured environments remains an open challenge in robotics. Due to the computational complexity of collision-free motion generation, existing methods either generate global trajectories for static scenarios, or employ models that make conservative assumptions about the environment. This paper identifies the primary bottleneck as the runtime performance demand of planning on high-fidelity environments, and the temporal integration between the perception and planning modules. Therefore, we propose a framework that does not compromise on runtime performance and world representations for perception and planning by accelerating world modeling and vector-field based planning using the GPU. This allows us to achieve faster parallel state exploration for quasi-global trajectory planning, and tighter coupling of the perception-action loop in real-time for dynamic cluttered environments with off-the-shelf depth sensors. We quantitatively evaluate the computation-time and success rate differences for the CPU and GPU versions of our planner, and perform qualitative evaluations of our coupled framework using real-world experiments on a 7-DoF Franka Emika robot. Experimental results demonstrate that our GPU-based framework achieves up to a 5x speedup over the CPU version and successfully avoids collisions across both trivial and challenging physical world scenarios.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.