Taylor Sheridan has become one of the most prolific and popular showrunners in television today. (He's so popular that several networks have attempted to lure him away from Paramount over the years, with NBCUniversal successfully sealing a deal with him.) While Sheridan has found success as a screenwriter, penning films like Sicario and Those Who Wish Me Dead, it's his television empire that has made him a household name, and he's responsible for developing or writing 11 series and counting.
The most popular of Sheridan's shows is, of course, Yellowstone, the epic drama about the Dutton family and their Montana ranch, but his empire is constantly expanding. The recently released The Madison, once billed as a Yellowstone spinoff, is actually just its own series now, completely unrelated to the world of the Duttons. (And, ironically, the CBS series Marshals, which you can stream on Paramount Plus, is a Yellowstone spinoff, but Sheridan's not involved.) The newest addition to the Yellowstone universe is Dutton Ranch, which stars Yellowstone alums Kelly Reilly and Cole Hauser, who reprise their roles as Beth Dutton and Rip Wheeler as they relocate to South Texas.
All of Sheridan's shows are available to stream now, with Yellowstone available on Peacock, and the rest on Paramount Plus. (You can also catch Lawmen: Bass Reeves on Netflix, where it just arrived.) Here's what you need to know to watch all of Sheridan's shows.
Peacock
The Paramount Network greenlit Yellowstone in 2017, and its first episode premiered in 2018. The show, starring Kevin Costner as John Dutton, a Montana rancher with a complicated family and even more complicated political entanglements, lasted for five seasons and became the most popular series on the network and one of the biggest scripted hits on cable during its run. In what's probably one of the most surprising decisions of the streaming era, Paramount licensed the series' streaming rights to Peacock in 2020. So, you can tune in to all five seasons of the show there, but not on Paramount Plus. (Paramount did retain the rights to all other Yellowstone properties, so the show's spinoffs and prequels are on Paramount Plus.)
Paramount Plus
Kelly Reilly and Cole Hauser are back as Beth and Rip in the new 2026 Yellowstone spinoff Dutton Ranch, which premiered on May 15 on Paramount Plus and the Paramount Network. The series follows the two familiar faces as they relocate to Texas, where their new ranch becomes an unwelcome rival to another nearby ranch. Ed Harris and Annette Bening co-star, and new episodes of season 1 will arrive weekly.
The Madison is the newest Taylor Sheridan series to arrive on Paramount Plus, and this one is a standalone story, unrelated to the Yellowstone universe. The show stars Michelle Pfeiffer and Kurt Russell as Stacy and Preston Clyburn, a couple who endure a tragedy and relocate their family from Manhattan to the rural Madison River Valley of Montana. The series co-stars Elle Chapman, Beau Garrett, Patrick J. Adams, Amiah Miller, Alaina Pollack and Matthew Fox. The first season consists of six episodes, and The Madison has been renewed for a second season.
1883 is the first limited series to be spun off from Yellowstone and is an origin story of the Dutton family. The cast includes Tim McGraw and Faith Hill as James and Margaret Dutton, the great-grandparents of Kevin Costner's John Dutton, and Isabel May as their daughter Elsa. Sam Elliott co-stars as the leader of the wagon train, helping the Duttons and several others cross the country so they can settle out west, ultimately ending up in Montana. The series consists of 10 episodes, which are all available on Paramount Plus.
1923 continues the chronological story of the Dutton family, set a generation after 1883. The show starred Helen Mirren and Harrison Ford as Cara and Jacob Dutton. Jacob, the older brother to Tim McGraw's James Dutton, has raised James's children, and the series follows them as they deal with the looming hardships of the Great Depression. The show ran for two seasons on Paramount Plus, where you can find all 16 episodes.
Mayor of Kingstown (2021-)
Mayor of Kingstown, Sheridan's first TV series set outside the Yellowstone universe, is still going strong after four seasons. (You can catch new episodes of season 4 streaming weekly this fall.) The crime series stars Jeremy Renner as Mike McLusky, a powerful broker between local criminals, politicians and inmates in the prison town of Kingstown, Michigan. You can watch every episode of Mayor of Kingstown on Paramount Plus. The show is confirmed to end after season 5.
Sylvester Stallone stars as Dwight "The General" Manfredi in Tulsa King, a series about a mobster who, fresh out of prison, heads to Tulsa and promptly sets up a new life of crime there. Three seasons are out now, and the show has been renewed for season 4. A spinoff series, Frisco King (formerly referred to as NOLA King), started filming in March 2026.
The Last Cowboy is the only unscripted series that has Sheridan's name attached, and it's about actual cowboys competing for a $1 million prize. There are five seasons of the competitive horse-reining series available on Paramount Plus.
Lawmen: Bass Reeves (2023)
Taylor Sheridan executive-produced Lawmen: Bass Reeves, though he didn't write or direct any of the show's eight episodes. Born into slavery, the real Bass Reeves, played on the show by David Oyelowo, eventually became one of the first African American deputy US marshals in the American West. There's been no word about a new season of the western crime drama, although show creator Chad Feehan has left the door open and says that it could become an anthology series about different historical figures. For now, you'll have to settle for the first season, which is available on Paramount Plus and just arrived on Netflix this June.
There are two seasons of the spy thriller Lioness (also known as Special Ops: Lioness) available on Paramount Plus, and the show has been renewed for a third season, which arrives on Aug. 2. The series stars Zoe Saldana as Joe McNamara, a CIA official in charge of the Lioness program, a group of undercover female operatives fighting terrorism. The show co-stars Nicole Kidman, Laysla De Oliveira and Morgan Freeman.
The Texas oil drama Landman boasts an impressive cast: Billy Bob Thornton, Demi Moore, Sam Elliott and Andy Garcia all co-star. In the series, Thornton stars as a petroleum landman working for an oil company and the show chronicles the gritty tension around the race to control the remaining supply of fossil fuels in Texas and the men who will stop at nothing to do so. A third season is also on its way.
Correction, March 26: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated Sheridan's credits on Lioness. He wrote all of its episodes and directed two.