Nintendo held its big showcase of upcoming Switch and Switch 2 games on Tuesday, and the biggest surprise, for once, wasn't a Nintendo game. Kingdom Hearts 4 made its debut with a teaser trailer during the show. However, Nintendo didn't reveal exactly when this game will come out.
In general, the Kingdom Hearts 4 trailer didn't show much about the game. One mysterious character spoke at the start, and following that was a series of snippets of combat featuring the series protagonist Sora. There was also a montage of other characters, including a short clip featuring Sora's companions Donald Duck and Goofy.
What's a bit surprising is the absence of Disney characters aside from that duo. The Kingdom Hearts series is developed and published by Square Enix, but it is a partnership between the company and Disney, which allows for a wide range of its characters' usage during the game.
Kingdom Hearts 4 trailer
The official story for the game, provided on Tuesday via a Nintendo press release, is that Sora is venturing to the mysterious city of Quadratrum. There, he will come across new figures and develop new powers while exploring different realms.
There was no release date mentioned for Kingdom Hearts 4, which could mean it may be some time before its launch. The trailer only mentioned the Switch 2 release for the game, but it's likely the game will be released on other platforms as well.
Kingdom Hearts fans waited six years after the announcement of Kingdom Hearts 3 before it was released in 2019. After the announcement was made, Kingdom Hearts creator Tetsuya Nomura said the reveal of the game was too early, as development was barely underway. The game had multiple setbacks, leading to delays and, at times, extended radio silence by Square Enix on when it would be released.
Kingdom Hearts 3 did eventually get released, and it, along with the other games in the series, is now being rereleased on the Switch 2, kind of. On the original Switch, Square Enix released the Kingdom Hearts Collection featuring the three games, but they could only be played on the cloud due to the Switch's lack of graphic power to run the games properly. Square Enix revealed a Switch 2 collection of the games, this time without the need for the cloud.
The Kingdom Hearts Collection for the Switch 2 will include Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 plus 2.5 ReMix, Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue and Kingdom Hearts 3 plus ReMind DLC. The collection will launch on Oct. 8 for $75, according to the Square Enix listing for the game.