Computer Science > Robotics
Title:ROBOSHACKLES: A Safety Dataset for Human-Injury Prevention in Embodied Foundation Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Embodied Foundation Models (EFMs) integrate multimodal understanding, future-state reasoning, and executable robot actions. Yet their safety alignment for human-injury prevention remains underexplored, primarily because real-world data of robots harming humans or creating hazardous household situations cannot be safely or ethically collected. To address this challenge, we propose a safety-critical data construction pipeline for human-injury prevention in this http URL from real DROID observations, our construction pipeline proceeds through scene understanding, hazard-aware image editing, temporal prompt generation, and single-pass rollout synthesis. The temporal prompts specify the expected scene evolution, while Wan2.7 synthesizes realistic robotic rollouts from the edited hazardous states in a single pass. Using this pipeline, we construct ROBOSHACKLES, a 10,000-clip robotic video dataset derived from real DROID observations, spanning two direct-harm and four indirect-harm categories. To ensure dataset quality, we assess task completion and visual quality with automatic metrics, and evaluate six representative EFMs under a refusal-based safety criterion. Results show that all evaluated models produce unsafe actions in the tested safety-critical scenarios, yielding a 100% unsafe action generation rate. ROBOSHACKLES serves as a scalable benchmark and training resource for refusal learning and hazard anticipation before robot action this http URL dataset is publicly available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.