Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Optimising Inpainting Data with Delaunay Averages
View PDFAbstract:Inpainting-based image compression usually stores an optimised subset of all pixel locations and their colour values. In the decoding phase, the missing data are approximated via inpainting. Since the reconstruction quality depends critically on the selection of the stored data, we introduce a novel feature type: We store the vertex locations of a Delaunay triangulation together with the average colour values inside all triangles. We show that combining this feature type with homogeneous diffusion inpainting creates an elegant mathematical formulation with a positive definite linear system of equations. Even a simple solver such as the conjugate gradient method allows the handling of large images. To make our Delaunay averages maximally adaptive to the image, we develop an efficient data optimisation strategy specifically tailored to them. It incorporates ideas successfully used in the stippling literature. Experiments show that our approach outperforms the popular inpainting with optimised colour values by a large margin. Last but not least, we discover a favourable scaling behaviour: Doubling the image resolution allows us to halve the percentage of stored data while maintaining the quality level. This is attractive for compressing modern high-resolution images, where even data densities below 1 % yield appealing reconstructions.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.