Computer Science > Robotics
Title:TacStyle: Personalizing Tactile Robot Policies using Structured Behavior Representations
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Robotic systems that assist humans should be capable of adapting their behaviors to individual user preferences. For instance, users may want a robot arm to adjust the amount of force it applies while folding their laundry or cleaning furniture. Natural language provides an intuitive way for humans to communicate such preferences. Recent progress in language-conditioned robot policies has shown that robots can successfully use language prompts to determine what task to perform. However, extending the same approach to realize how the task should be performed requires detailed labels describing the preferences or styles of trajectories in the task data. Not only is collecting such annotations challenging, but conditioning directly on these labels may also fail to provide fine-grained control over a continuous range of behaviors. For example, it can be difficult to convey the exact force that a robot must apply through abstract instructions like "apply a bit more pressure than before". Therefore, in this work, we propose using language to reason over preferred behaviors instead of directly generating them. We first learn a structured latent representation that organizes user preferences according to differences in the corresponding trajectories. Then, given a preference prompt, we use a foundation model to interpret this latent space and choose a value that produces the desired behavior. Through both simulation and real-world experiments, we show that selecting robot behaviors from an intuitively structured latent space enables more precise adaptation to user preferences while requiring significantly fewer preference labels than language-conditioned policies.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.