Partnering to apply frontier AI to advance health and life sciences, reimagine classrooms and support the workforce of the future.
At Google DeepMind, we believe frontier AI can be a powerful force for good. Last year, we opened a new research lab in Singapore to expand the impact of our work across the Asia-Pacific region. Today, we are taking a major step forward. As part of our National Partnerships for AI initiative, we are launching new programmes in the country, while driving a key pillar of Googleâs new National AI partnership with the Singapore Government.
Through our work with multiple organisations, we are partnering to support public sector transformation, foster business growth and empower workers to thrive in an AI-first world. The partnership focuses on addressing real-world challengesâincluding improving healthcare, accelerating scientific discovery and reimagining educationâto ensure these technological breakthroughs translate into meaningful progress across Singaporeâs diverse communities. Together, we are strengthening Singaporeâs National AI Strategy to responsibly deploy AI at scale for economic growth and public benefit. Ultimately, by accelerating science and innovation, AI could create an additional S$ 3.3 billion (US$2.5 billion) in economic value through faster R&D by 2040.
Addressing complex societal challenges
At the heart of this partnership is a shared commitment to accelerating local research and development that turns frontier AI potential into real, inclusive progress. Our team on the ground in Singapore is working alongside local experts to apply frontier AI responsibly to areas where it can have the most meaningful impact for and with the community, starting with healthcare and life sciences.
- Augmenting care with AI co-clinician: We are exploring a collaboration with public health clusters as part of our global AI co-clinician research initiative. This work explores how AI can augment and support a doctorâs expertise to deliver higher quality care. It also looks into the evolution of healthcare to âtriadic care,â where AI agents support patients throughout their care journeys under the clinical authority of their physician, with systems providing information sourced from clinical guidelines and scientific literature.
- Advancing pandemic preparedness: With Google.org, we will support initiatives that advance infectious disease research and pandemic preparedness. Using frontier AI like AlphaFold and Google Earth and other latest AI for Science tools, we are working to accelerate our understanding of outbreaks across Southeast Asia. This is part of Google.orgâs $7 million funding contribution to the Philanthropy Asia Allianceâs Health for Human Potential coalition.
- Innovating for inclusivity: We are developing a Gemma-powered running assistant designed for blind and low vision athletes. By using spatial reasoning that provides real-time environmental understanding, this tool helps the athletes run independently without physical lines or human guides. We are partnering with SG EnableâSingaporeâs focal agency for disability and inclusionâto test and iterate the product so it meets the real-world needs of vision-impaired runners.
- Accelerating scientific discovery: We are partnering with the National Research Foundation to train local researchers on agentic AI for science tools like Hypothesis Generation built with Co-Scientist, which are already showing promise in a range of biomedical applications. We will also host workshops to help Singaporeâs local scientific community use these frontier tools to unlock new breakthroughs.
Enhancing education and building a future-ready workforce
As we navigate the transition to an AI-driven economy, our goal is to ensure that communities across Singapore have the opportunity to thrive. We are partnering with the ecosystem to co-design programs that empower educators and learners to navigate new technologies responsibly.
We have provided Gemini for Education to all educators from primary schools to junior colleges and will provide training on these pedagogically grounded AI tools. This will help teachers plan lessons, and tailor course material, freeing up precious time to focus on what matters: teaching. We will continue to collaborate with the Ministry of Education to strengthen its AI capabilities across teaching and learning, including educator training and upskilling programmes.
Driving innovations for sustainability
Building a truly prosperous future requires a responsible and collaborative approach to global sustainability. We are launching the âGoogle DeepMind Accelerator: AI for the Planetâ in the Asia-Pacific region to partner with the next generation of climate visionaries. This program is designed to support startups, research teams and nonprofits using frontier AI to unlock new approaches to complex environmental challenges in areas like energy, water, agriculture and more. Selected organizations will receive expert mentorship, tailored support and help integrate frontier AI into their work, helping turn visionary ideas into meaningful progress.
Pioneering responsible AI together
To ensure that innovation serves as a true force for good, we believe it must be grounded in a shared foundation of responsibility. Google DeepMind is collaborating with the Infocomm Media Development Authority (IMDA) and MLCommons to research multimodal and multilingual safety benchmarks. This collaboration is focused on supporting the safe and responsible deployment of AI that respects the nuance of local languages and cultures, helping to ensure that the digital future we build is one that is designed for and with everyone.
Shaping a prosperous future for all
This partnership is a significant milestone in our journey with Singapore. By combining frontier research with local expertise, we can address complex societal challenges together and create new opportunities for growth.
We look forward to working with researchers, doctors, educators and students to help ensure AI serves the diverse needs of communities across Singapore.