Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Efficient-WAM: A 1B-Parameter World-Action Model with Low-Cost Future Imagination
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:World-Action Models (WAMs) have emerged as a promising paradigm for embodied control by coupling future visual prediction with action generation. However, most existing WAMs rely on photorealistic future prediction, which incurs high inference latency and makes real-time robot deployment difficult. This motivates a more efficient WAM design that preserves the control benefits of future visual prediction while reducing its inference cost. We introduce Efficient-WAM, a World-Action Model that reduces the cost of future imagination while preserving its control benefit. Efficient-WAM improves inference efficiency via a compact video expert transferred from WAN-2.2-5B, token-sparse video latents, and asymmetric video-action denoising that allocates fewer sampling steps to video than to actions. Instead of optimizing the future branch for visual fidelity, Efficient-WAM treats future video prediction as a compact guidance signal for action generation. Comprehensive experiments on RoboTwin 2.0 and real-world manipulation tasks show that Efficient-WAM maintains strong action performance despite visibly coarse future predictions. While maintaining competitive control capabilities, our 1B-parameter model can reduce per-chunk latency to around 100 ms during physical deployment, achieving a 30x speedup over existing WAMs.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.