Highlights from my conversation about agentic engineering on Lenny’s Podcast
Plus Mr. Chatterbox the Victorian LLM, and Google's excellent new Gemma 4
In this newsletter:
Highlights from my conversation about agentic engineering on Lenny’s Podcast
Mr. Chatterbox is a (weak) Victorian-era ethically trained model you can run on your own computer
Plus 3 links and 3 quotations and 1 note
Sponsor message: If you’re building SaaS, especially AI, you quickly need enterprise features like SAML, SCIM, and audit logs. WorkOS lets you ship auth, SSO, RBAC, and more in days, not months, all designed to integrate directly into your product.
I was a guest on Lenny Rachitsky’s podcast, in a new episode titled An AI state of the union: We’ve passed the inflection point, dark factories are coming, and automation timelines. It’s available on YouTube, Spotify, and Apple Podcasts. Here are my highlights from our conversation, with relevant links.
The November inflection point
4:19 - The end result of these two labs throwing everything they had at making their models better at code is that in November we had what I call the inflection point where GPT 5.1 and Claude Opus 4.5 came along.
They were both incrementally better than the previous models, but in a way that crossed a threshold where previously the code would mostly work, but you had to pay very close attention to it. And suddenly we went from that to... almost all of the time it does what you told it to do, which makes all of the difference in the world.
Now you can spin up a coding agent and say, build me a Mac application that does this thing, and you’ll get something back which won’t just be a buggy pile of rubbish that doesn’t do anything.
Software engineers as bellwethers for other information workers
5:49 - I can churn out 10,000 lines of code in a day. And most of it works. Is that good? Like, how do we get from most of it works to all of it works? There are so many new questions that we’re facing, which I think makes us a bellwether for other information workers.
Code is easier than almost every other problem that you pose these agents because code is obviously right or wrong - either it works or it doesn’t work. There might be a few subtle hidden bugs, but generally you can tell if the thing actually works.
If it writes you an essay, if it prepares a lawsuit for you, it’s so much harder to derive if it’s actually done a good job, and to figure out if it got things right or wrong. But it’s happening to us as software engineers. It came for us first.
And we’re figuring out, OK, what do our careers look like? How do we work as teams when part of what we did that used to take most of the time doesn’t take most of the time anymore? What does that look like? And it’s going to be very interesting seeing how this rolls out to other information work in the future.
Lawyers are falling for this really badly. The AI hallucination cases database is up to 1,228 cases now!
Plus this bit from the cold open at the start:
It used to be you’d ask ChatGPT for some code, and it would spit out some code, and you’d have to run it and test it. The coding agents take that step for you now. And an open question for me is how many other knowledge work fields are actually prone to these agent loops?
Writing code on my phone
8:19 - I write so much of my code on my phone. It’s wild. I can get good work done walking the dog along the beach, which is delightful.
I mainly use the Claude iPhone app for this, both with a regular Claude chat session (which can execute code now) or using it to control Claude Code for web.
Responsible vibe coding
9:55 If you’re vibe coding something for yourself, where the only person who gets hurt if it has bugs is you, go wild. That’s completely fine. The moment you ship your vibe coding code for other people to use, where your bugs might actually harm somebody else, that’s when you need to take a step back.
See also When is it OK to vibe code?
Dark Factories and StrongDM
12:49 The reason it’s called the dark factory is there’s this idea in factory automation that if your factory is so automated that you don’t need any people there, you can turn the lights off. Like the machines can operate in complete darkness if you don’t need people on the factory floor. What does that look like for software? [...]
So there’s this policy that nobody writes any code: you cannot type code into a computer. And honestly, six months ago, I thought that was crazy. And today, probably 95% of the code that I produce, I didn’t type myself. That world is practical already because the latest models are good enough that you can tell them to rename that variable and refactor and add this line there... and they’ll just do it - it’s faster than you typing on the keyboard yourself.
The next rule though, is nobody reads the code. And this is the thing which StrongDM started doing last year.
I wrote a lot more about StrongDM’s dark factory explorations back in February.
The bottleneck has moved to testing
21:27 - It used to be, you’d come up with a spec and you hand it to your engineering team. And three weeks later, if you’re lucky, they’d come back with an implementation. And now that maybe takes three hours, depending on how well the coding agents are established for that kind of thing. So now what, right? Now, where else are the bottlenecks?
Anyone who’s done any product work knows that your initial ideas are always wrong. What matters is proving them, and testing them.
We can test things so much faster now because we can build workable prototypes so much quicker. So there’s an interesting thing I’ve been doing in my own work where any feature that I want to design, I’ll often prototype three different ways it could work because that takes very little time.
I’ve always loved prototyping things, and prototyping is even more valuable now.
22:40 - A UI prototype is free now. ChatGPT and Claude will just build you a very convincing UI for anything that you describe. And that’s how you should be working. I think anyone who’s doing product design and isn’t vibe coding little prototypes is missing out on the most powerful boost that we get in that step.
But then what do you do? Given your three options that you have instead of one option, how do you prove to yourself which one of those is the best? I don’t have a confident answer to that. I expect this is where the good old fashioned usability testing comes in.
More on prototyping later on:
46:35 - Throughout my entire career, my superpower has been prototyping. I’ve been very quick at knocking out working prototypes of things. I’m the person who can show up at a meeting and say, look, here’s how it could work. And that was kind of my unique selling point. And that’s gone. Anyone can do what I could do.
This stuff is exhausting
26:25 - I’m finding that using coding agents well is taking every inch of my 25 years of experience as a software engineer, and it is mentally exhausting. I can fire up four agents in parallel and have them work on four different problems. And by like 11 AM, I am wiped out for the day. [...]
There’s a personal skill we have to learn in finding our new limits - what’s a responsible way for us not to burn out.
I’ve talked to a lot of people who are losing sleep because they’re like, my coding agents could be doing work for me. I’m just going to stay up an extra half hour and set off a bunch of extra things... and then waking up at four in the morning. That’s obviously unsustainable. [...]
There’s an element of sort of gambling and addiction to how we’re using some of these tools.
Interruptions cost a lot less now
45:16 - People talk about how important it is not to interrupt your coders. Your coders need to have solid two to four hour blocks of uninterrupted work so they can spin up their mental model and churn out the code. That’s changed completely. My programming work, I need two minutes every now and then to prompt my agent about what to do next. And then I can do the other stuff and I can go back. I’m much more interruptible than I used to be.
My ability to estimate software is broken
28:19 - I’ve got 25 years of experience in how long it takes to build something. And that’s all completely gone - it doesn’t work anymore because I can look at a problem and say that this is going to take two weeks, so it’s not worth it. And now it’s like... maybe it’s going to take 20 minutes because the reason it would have taken two weeks was all of the sort of crufty coding things that the AI is now covering for us.
I constantly throw tasks at AI that I don’t think it’ll be able to do because every now and then it does it. And when it doesn’t do it, you learn, right? But when it does do something, especially something that the previous models couldn’t do, that’s actually cutting edge AI research.
And a related anecdote:
36:56 - A lot of my friends have been talking about how they have this backlog of side projects, right? For the last 10, 15 years, they’ve got projects they never quite finished. And some of them are like, well, I’ve done them all now. Last couple of months, I just went through and every evening I’m like, let’s take that project and finish it. And they almost feel a sort of sense of loss at the end where they’re like, well, okay, my backlog’s gone. Now what am I going to build?
It’s tough for people in the middle
29:29 - So ThoughtWorks, the big IT consultancy, did an offsite about a month ago, and they got a whole bunch of engineering VPs in from different companies to talk about this stuff. And one of the interesting theories they came up with is they think this stuff is really good for experienced engineers, like it amplifies their skills. It’s really good for new engineers because it solves so many of those onboarding problems. The problem is the people in the middle. If you’re mid-career, if you haven’t made it to sort of super senior engineer yet, but you’re not sort of new either, that’s the group which is probably in the most trouble right now.
I mentioned Cloudflare hiring 1,000 interns, and Shopify too.
Lenny asked for my advice for people stuck in that middle:
31:21 - That’s a big responsibility you’re putting on me there! I think the way forward is to lean into this stuff and figure out how do I help this make me better?
A lot of people worry about skill atrophy: if the AI is doing it for you, you’re not learning anything. I think if you’re worried about that, you push back at it. You have to be mindful about how you’re applying the technology and think, okay, I’ve been given this thing that can answer any question and often gets it right. How can I use this to amplify my own skills, to learn new things, to take on much more ambitious projects? [...]
33:05 - Everything is changing so fast right now. The only universal skill is being able to roll with the changes. That’s the thing that we all need.
The term that comes up most in these conversations about how you can be great with AI is agency. I think agents have no agency at all. I would argue that the one thing AI can never have is agency because it doesn’t have human motivations.
So I’d say that’s the thing is to invest in your own agency and invest in how to use this technology to get better at what you do and to do new things.
It’s harder to evaluate software
The fact that it’s so easy to create software with detailed documentation and robust tests means it’s harder to figure out what’s a credible project.
37:47 Sometimes I’ll have an idea for a piece of software, Python library or whatever, and I can knock it out in like an hour and get to a point where it’s got documentation and tests and all of those things, and it looks like the kind of software that previously I’d have spent several weeks on - and I can stick it up on GitHub
And yet... I don’t believe in it. And the reason I don’t believe in it is that I got to rush through all of those things... I think the quality is probably good, but I haven’t spent enough time with it to feel confident in that quality. Most importantly, I haven’t used it yet.
It turns out when I’m using somebody else’s software, the thing I care most about is I want them to have used it for months.
I’ve got some very cool software that I built that I’ve never used. It was quicker to build it than to actually try and use it!
The misconception that AI tools are easy
41:31 - Everyone’s like, oh, it must be easy. It’s just a chat bot. It’s not easy. That’s one of the great misconceptions in AI is that using these tools effectively is easy. It takes a lot of practice and it takes a lot of trying things that didn’t work and trying things that did work.
Coding agents are useful for security research now
19:04 - In the past sort of three to six months, they’ve started being credible as security researchers, which is sending shockwaves through the security research industry.
See Thomas Ptacek: Vulnerability Research Is Cooked.
At the same time, open source projects are being bombarded with junk security reports:
20:05 - There are these people who don’t know what they’re doing, who are asking ChatGPT to find a security hole and then reporting it to the maintainer. And the report looks good. ChatGPT can produce a very well formatted report of a vulnerability. It’s a total waste of time. It’s not actually verified as being a real problem.
A good example of the right way to do this is Anthropic’s collaboration with Firefox, where Anthropic’s security team verified every security problem before passing them to Mozilla.
OpenClaw
Of course we had to talk about OpenClaw! Lenny had his running on a Mac Mini.
1:29:23 - OpenClaw demonstrates that people want a personal digital assistant so much that they are willing to not just overlook the security side of things, but also getting the thing running is not easy. You’ve got to create API keys and tokens and install stuff. It’s not trivial to get set up and hundreds of thousands of people got it set up. [...]
The first line of code for OpenClaw was written on November the 25th. And then in the Super Bowl, there was an ad for AI.com, which was effectively a vaporware white labeled OpenClaw hosting provider. So we went from first line of code in November to Super Bowl ad in what? Three and a half months.
I continue to love Drew Breunig’s description of OpenClaw as a digital pet:
A friend of mine said that OpenClaw is basically a Tamagotchi. It’s a digital pet and you buy the Mac Mini as an aquarium.
Journalists are good at dealing with unreliable sources
In talking about my explorations of AI for data journalism through Datasette:
1:34:58 - You would have thought that AI is a very bad fit for journalism where the whole idea is to find the truth. But the flip side is journalists deal with untrustworthy sources all the time. The art of journalism is you talk to a bunch of people and some of them lie to you and you figure out what’s true. So as long as the journalist treats the AI as yet another unreliable source, they’re actually better equipped to work with AI than most other professions are.
The pelican benchmark
Obviously we talked about pelicans riding bicycles:
56:10 - There appears to be a very strong correlation between how good their drawing of a pelican riding a bicycle is and how good they are at everything else. And nobody can explain to me why that is. [...]
People kept on asking me, what if labs cheat on the benchmark? And my answer has always been, really, all I want from life is a really good picture of a pelican riding a bicycle. And if I can trick every AI lab in the world into cheating on benchmarks to get it, then that just achieves my goal.
59:56 - I think something people often miss is that this space is inherently funny. The fact that we have these incredibly expensive, power hungry, supposedly the most advanced computers of all time. And if you ask them to draw a pelican on a bicycle, it looks like a five-year-old drew it. That’s really funny to me.
And finally, some good news about parrots
Lenny asked if I had anything else I wanted to leave listeners with to wrap up the show, so I went with the best piece of news in the world right now.
1:38:10 - There is a rare parrot in New Zealand called the Kākāpō. There are only 250 of these parrots left in the world. They are flightless nocturnal parrots - beautiful green dumpy looking things. And the good news is they’re having a fantastic breeding season in 2026,
They only breed when the Rimu trees in New Zealand have a mass fruiting season, and the Rimu trees haven’t done that since 2022 - so there has not been a single baby kākāpō born in four years.
This year, the Rimu trees are in fruit. The kākāpō are breeding. There have been dozens of new chicks born. It’s a really, really good time. It’s great news for rare New Zealand parrots and you should look them up because they’re delightful.
Everyone should watch the live stream of Rakiura on her nest with two chicks!
YouTube chapters
Here’s the full list of chapters Lenny’s team defined for the YouTube video:
00:00: Introduction to Simon Willison
02:40: The November 2025 inflection point
08:01: What’s possible now with AI coding
10:42: Vibe coding vs. agentic engineering
13:57: The dark-factory pattern
20:41: Where bottlenecks have shifted
23:36: Where human brains will continue to be valuable
25:32: Defending of software engineers
29:12: Why experienced engineers get better results
30:48: Advice for avoiding the permanent underclass
33:52: Leaning into AI to amplify your skills
35:12: Why Simon says he’s working harder than ever
37:23: The market for pre-2022 human-written code
40:01: Prediction: 50% of engineers writing 95% AI code by the end of 2026
44:34: The impact of cheap code
48:27: Simon’s AI stack
54:08: Using AI for research
55:12: The pelican-riding-a-bicycle benchmark
59:01: The inherent ridiculousness of AI
1:00:52: Hoarding things you know how to do
1:08:21: Red/green TDD pattern for better AI code
1:14:43: Starting projects with good templates
1:16:31: The lethal trifecta and prompt injection
1:21:53: Why 97% effectiveness is a failing grade
1:25:19: The normalization of deviance
1:28:32: OpenClaw: the security nightmare everyone is looking past
1:34:22: What’s next for Simon
1:36:47: Zero-deliverable consulting
1:38:05: Good news about Kakapo parrots
Mr. Chatterbox is a (weak) Victorian-era ethically trained model you can run on your own computer - 2026-03-30
Trip Venturella released Mr. Chatterbox, a language model trained entirely on out-of-copyright text from the British Library. Here’s how he describes it in the model card:
Mr. Chatterbox is a language model trained entirely from scratch on a corpus of over 28,000 Victorian-era British texts published between 1837 and 1899, drawn from a dataset made available by the British Library. The model has absolutely no training inputs from after 1899 — the vocabulary and ideas are formed exclusively from nineteenth-century literature.
Mr. Chatterbox’s training corpus was 28,035 books, with an estimated 2.93 billion input tokens after filtering. The model has roughly 340 million paramaters, roughly the same size as GPT-2-Medium. The difference is, of course, that unlike GPT-2, Mr. Chatterbox is trained entirely on historical data.
Given how hard it is to train a useful LLM without using vast amounts of scraped, unlicensed data I’ve been dreaming of a model like this for a couple of years now. What would a model trained on out-of-copyright text be like to chat with?
Thanks to Trip we can now find out for ourselves!
The model itself is tiny, at least by Large Language Model standards - just 2.05GB on disk. You can try it out using Trip’s HuggingFace Spaces demo:
Honestly, it’s pretty terrible. Talking with it feels more like chatting with a Markov chain than an LLM - the responses may have a delightfully Victorian flavor to them but it’s hard to get a response that usefully answers a question.
The 2022 Chinchilla paper suggests a ratio of 20x the parameter count to training tokens. For a 340m model that would suggest around 7 billion tokens, more than twice the British Library corpus used here. The smallest Qwen 3.5 model is 600m parameters and that model family starts to get interesting at 2b - so my hunch is we would need 4x or more the training data to get something that starts to feel like a useful conversational partner.
But what a fun project!
Running it locally with LLM
I decided to see if I could run the model on my own machine using my LLM framework.
I got Claude Code to do most of the work - here’s the transcript.
Trip trained the model using Andrej Karpathy’s nanochat, so I cloned that project, pulled the model weights and told Claude to build a Python script to run the model. Once we had that working (which ended up needing some extra details from the Space demo source code) I had Claude read the LLM plugin tutorial and build the rest of the plugin.
llm-mrchatterbox is the result. Install the plugin like this:
llm install llm-mrchatterbox
The first time you run a prompt it will fetch the 2.05GB model file from Hugging Face. Try that like this:
llm -m mrchatterbox "Good day, sir"
Or start an ongoing chat session like this:
llm chat -m mrchatterbox
If you don’t have LLM installed you can still get a chat session started from scratch using uvx like this:
uvx --with llm-mrchatterbox llm chat -m mrchatterbox
When you are finished with the model you can delete the cached file using:
llm mrchatterbox delete-model
This is the first time I’ve had Claude Code build a full LLM model plugin from scratch and it worked really well. I expect I’ll be using this method again in the future.
I continue to hope we can get a useful model from entirely public domain data. The fact that Trip was able to get this far using nanochat and 2.93 billion training tokens is a promising start.
Update 31st March 2026: I had missed this when I first published this piece but Trip has his own detailed writeup of the project which goes into much more detail about how he trained the model. Here’s how the books were filtered for pre-training:
First, I downloaded the British Library dataset split of all 19th-century books. I filtered those down to books contemporaneous with the reign of Queen Victoria—which, unfortunately, cut out the novels of Jane Austen—and further filtered those down to a set of books with a optical character recognition (OCR) confidence of .65 or above, as listed in the metadata. This left me with 28,035 books, or roughly 2.93 billion tokes for pretraining data.
Getting it to behave like a conversational model was a lot harder. Trip started by trying to train on plays by Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw, but found they didn’t provide enough pairs. Then he tried extracting dialogue pairs from the books themselves with poor results. The approach that worked was to have Claude Haiku and GPT-4o-mini generate synthetic conversation pairs for the supervised fine tuning, which solved the problem but sadly I think dilutes the “no training inputs from after 1899” claim from the original model card.
Quote 2026-03-28
The thing about agentic coding is that agents grind problems into dust. Give an agent a problem and a while loop and - long term - it’ll solve that problem even if it means burning a trillion tokens and re-writing down to the silicon. [...]
But we want AI agents to solve coding problems quickly and in a way that is maintainable and adaptive and composable (benefiting from improvements elsewhere), and where every addition makes the whole stack better.
So at the bottom is really great libraries that encapsulate hard problems, with great interfaces that make the “right” way the easy way for developers building apps with them. Architecture!
While I’m vibing (I call it vibing now, not coding and not vibe coding) while I’m vibing, I am looking at lines of code less than ever before, and thinking about architecture more than ever before.
Matt Webb, An appreciation for (technical) architecture
Link 2026-03-29 Pretext:
Exciting new browser library from Cheng Lou, previously a React core developer and the original creator of the react-motion animation library.
Pretext solves the problem of calculating the height of a paragraph of line-wrapped text without touching the DOM. The usual way of doing this is to render the text and measure its dimensions, but this is extremely expensive. Pretext uses an array of clever tricks to make this much, much faster, which enables all sorts of new text rendering effects in browser applications.
Here’s one demo that shows the kind of things this makes possible:
The key to how this works is the way it separates calculations into a call to a prepare()
function followed by multiple calls to layout()
.
The prepare()
function splits the input text into segments (effectively words, but it can take things like soft hyphens and non-latin character sequences and emoji into account as well) and measures those using an off-screen canvas, then caches the results. This is comparatively expensive but only runs once.
The layout()
function can then emulate the word-wrapping logic in browsers to figure out how many wrapped lines the text will occupy at a specified width and measure the overall height.
I had Claude build me this interactive artifact to help me visually understand what’s going on, based on a simplified version of Pretext itself.
The way this is tested is particularly impressive. The earlier tests rendered a full copy of the Great Gatsby in multiple browsers to confirm that the estimated measurements were correct against a large volume of text. This was later joined by the corpora/ folder using the same technique against lengthy public domain documents in Thai, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Arabic, and more.
Cheng Lou says:
The engine’s tiny (few kbs), aware of browser quirks, supports all the languages you’ll need, including Korean mixed with RTL Arabic and platform-specific emojis
This was achieved through showing Claude Code and Codex the browsers ground truth, and have them measure & iterate against those at every significant container width, running over weeks
Quote 2026-03-30
Note that the main issues that people currently unknowingly face with local models mostly revolve around the harness and some intricacies around model chat templates and prompt construction. Sometimes there are even pure inference bugs. From typing the task in the client to the actual result, there is a long chain of components that atm are not only fragile - are also developed by different parties. So it’s difficult to consolidate the entire stack and you have to keep in mind that what you are currently observing is with very high probability still broken in some subtle way along that chain.
Georgi Gerganov, explaining why it’s hard to find local models that work well with coding agents
Link 2026-03-31 Supply Chain Attack on Axios Pulls Malicious Dependency from npm:
Useful writeup of today’s supply chain attack against Axios, the HTTP client NPM package with 101 million weekly downloads. Versions 1.14.1
and 0.30.4
both included a new dependency called plain-crypto-js
which was freshly published malware, stealing credentials and installing a remote access trojan (RAT).
It looks like the attack came from a leaked long-lived npm token. Axios have an open issue to adopt trusted publishing, which would ensure that only their GitHub Actions workflows are able to publish to npm. The malware packages were published without an accompanying GitHub release, which strikes me as a useful heuristic for spotting potentially malicious releases - the same pattern was present for LiteLLM last week as well.
Quote 2026-04-01
I want to argue that AI models will write good code because of economic incentives. Good code is cheaper to generate and maintain. Competition is high between the AI models right now, and the ones that win will help developers ship reliable features fastest, which requires simple, maintainable code. Good code will prevail, not only because we want it to (though we do!), but because economic forces demand it. Markets will not reward slop in coding, in the long-term.
Soohoon Choi, Slop Is Not Necessarily The Future
Note 2026-04-02
I just sent the March edition of my sponsors-only monthly newsletter. If you are a sponsor (or if you start a sponsorship now) you can access it here. In this month’s newsletter:
More agentic engineering patterns
Streaming experts with MoE models on a Mac
Model releases in March
Vibe porting
Supply chain attacks against PyPI and NPM
Stuff I shipped
What I’m using, March 2026 edition
And a couple of museums
Here’s a copy of the February newsletter as a preview of what you’ll get. Pay $10/month to stay a month ahead of the free copy!
Link 2026-04-02 Gemma 4: Byte for byte, the most capable open models:
Four new vision-capable Apache 2.0 licensed reasoning LLMs from Google DeepMind, sized at 2B, 4B, 31B, plus a 26B-A4B Mixture-of-Experts.
Google emphasize “unprecedented level of intelligence-per-parameter”, providing yet more evidence that creating small useful models is one of the hottest areas of research right now.
They actually label the two smaller models as E2B and E4B for “Effective” parameter size. The system card explains:
The smaller models incorporate Per-Layer Embeddings (PLE) to maximize parameter efficiency in on-device deployments. Rather than adding more layers or parameters to the model, PLE gives each decoder layer its own small embedding for every token. These embedding tables are large but are only used for quick lookups, which is why the effective parameter count is much smaller than the total.
I don’t entirely understand that, but apparently that’s what the “E” in E2B means!
One particularly exciting feature of these models is that they are multi-modal beyond just images:
Vision and audio: All models natively process video and images, supporting variable resolutions, and excelling at visual tasks like OCR and chart understanding. Additionally, the E2B and E4B models feature native audio input for speech recognition and understanding.
I’ve not figured out a way to run audio input locally - I don’t think that feature is in LM Studio or Ollama yet.
I tried them out using the GGUFs for LM Studio. The 2B (4.41GB), 4B (6.33GB) and 26B-A4B (17.99GB) models all worked perfectly, but the 31B (19.89GB) model was broken and spat out "---\n"
in a loop for every prompt I tried.
The succession of pelican quality from 2B to 4B to 26B-A4B is notable:
E2B:
E4B:
26B-A4B:
(This one actually had an SVG error - “error on line 18 at column 88: Attribute x1 redefined” - but after fixing that I got probably the best pelican I’ve seen yet from a model that runs on my laptop.)
Google are providing API access to the two larger Gemma models via their AI Studio. I added support to llm-gemini and then ran a pelican through the 31B model using that:
llm -m gemini/gemma-4-31b-it 'Generate an SVG of a pelican riding a bicycle'
Pretty good, though it is missing the front part of the bicycle frame: