On Monday, Govee announced a new partnership with Warner Bro.'s HBO, bringing new smart lighting features made specifically for House of the Dragon Season 3, following the Game of Thrones prequel premiere on Sunday.
You'll find Govee on several of our smart home lighting recommendation lists, for both indoors and outdoors. The company produces lights with a variety of customization options, including music syncing and algorithms that allow users to create lighting schemes based on their own prompts or photos they like. In this case, Govee is highlighting how its TV backlighting can work with shows like House of the Dragon.
Representatives from Govee and HBO did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
Govee's TV backlighting, ready for dragons and deception
A product like the Govee TV Backlight 3 Pro ($180) adds a strip around the edge of your TV and a three-part camera that's mounted on top. That camera looks at what's on the TV screen, then automatically adjusts the backlighting to match. It's an effect intended to make TVs look bigger, more cinematic and immersive. In this case, Govee mentions that its color-matching system can add gold ripples to Small Council meetings at the Red Keep, or alternate between low light and fiery reds during a nighttime dragon attack.
Color-shifting like this is also available for the Govee TV Backlight 3 Lite ($90) and the Govee TV Backlight 3 ($110), which come with fewer camera lenses than the Pro version.
But that's not all Govee is offering for Game of Thrones fans. The company is also adding themes for its wider range of lights.
New Govee light and app themes for anywhere in your home
For those who don't have a Govee TV Backlight product or want to extend the House of the Dragon theme to other areas of their homes, Govee has an additional creation. The company is adding three light scenes that can apply to any Govee lights, from replacement light bulbs working in concert to the company's skylights and light curtains.
The first is Dracyrus, an amber-and-ember theme that the company says evokes torchlight and dragon breath. The second is called Fire and Blood, made to mimic the crimson and black tones of Targaryen banners. And the third is Green Reign, an emerald-and-gold scene Govee made to reference royal intrigue in the Red Keep.
These scenes are available for any Govee lights. If you have a Govee product, update it and see if you can access these new themes ahead of the next episode.
We've tested Govee's TV backlights at CNET, and we'll let you know if we find them a particularly good accompaniment for House of the Dragon as the season progresses.