As Amazon’s Prime Day tech deals kick off again, in the middle of a persistent cost-of-living crisis, you may well be rolling your eyes. But there are some genuine deals on tech you’ll use every day. Why pay more? The trick is filtering out the noise and tuning into discounts on gadgets that are actually worth buying. Every one of the Prime Day tech deals you see here is on a device that has been tested by the WIRED Reviews team in our own homes, and we only recommend the best.
If you haven't found the deal you want yet, browse our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals, or dip into our Amazon Prime Day live blog for real-time updates.
- Apple's Best Earbuds: Apple AirPods Pro 3 for $180 ($70 off)
- Google's Great Smartphone: Google Pixel 10 for $549 ($250 off)
- LG's Stunning OLED TV: LG C5 65-inch OLED TV for $1,300 ($100 off)
- Netgear's Speedy Mesh: Netgear Orbi 770 Series Mesh (3-Pack) for $595 ($105 off)
- TerraMow's Lovely Lawnmower: TerraMow V1000 for $1,119 ($280 off) [Clip the Coupon]
The flagship Apple AirPods Pro 3 are its best wireless earbuds. Music sounds fantastic on these buds; they offer the best noise cancellation around and deliver excellent call quality. Apple added more ear tips for a better fit for small ears, new tools like heart rate sensing and live translation, and enhanced support for folks with hearing loss. If you use an iPhone, these are the wireless earbuds for you, and I've never seen them cheaper than this.
With the same gorgeous, comfortable, iconic design as its predecessor, Apple’s AirPods Max 2 bring improved noise canceling and Bluetooth connectivity. Apple also upgraded software features, like gesture controls and Adaptive Audio. They’re a bit pricey at the RRP, but this discount is decent for Apple fans.
One of the best Prime Day headphone deals we've seen, Sony's WH-1000XM6 are simply the best noise-canceling headphones ever. If you want to block out even the most disruptive background noise, while also enjoying frankly superb audio performance no matter which genre of music you’re listening to, these are the cans you need.
Packed with Google’s latest artificial intelligence features and one of the best camera systems available, the Pixel 10 might be the best Android phone for most folks right now. You can expect solid performance, a quirky design, and Google’s elegant take on Android software. Its bigger siblings offer slight improvements, but won’t justify the extra expense for most people, especially when the Pixel 10 is discounted like this.
Nimble is a cool company that strives to be environmentally friendly and it makes some of the best power banks you can buy. The Champ series is reliable, has a fun design, and will keep your smartphone topped up when you need it most. The larger Champ Pro is also on sale if you need more power.
If you want something hard-wearing and fast charging from the best USB-C cables, this is our pick. It tops out at 240 watts, and has a tough, braided nylon exterior made from 100 percent recycled plastic. Anker promises this cable will last a century and it can operate in temperatures from -40 degrees to 176 degrees Fahrenheit. The ribbed cuffs make it easy to grip, it’s USB-IF certified, and there’s a lifetime warranty.
Home cinephiles willing to drop some cash for one of the best TVs this year will struggle to find a better option than the LG C5. It boasts perfect contrast, fantastic highlights, and vibrant color, and gets bright enough for well-lit rooms. It supports a 144-Hz refresh rate and Nvidia G-Sync for gamers, and there’s Dolby Vision for movie fans. We also love the LG Magic Remote, which makes it easy to navigate LG’s relatively good tvOS interface. This TV has been steadily dropping from its original $2,700 MSRP, but this is the lowest price yet.
This is the best monitor for your home office, especially at this price. It is a 4K monitor with great color and a 120-Hz refresh rate, and it comes with a beautiful white stand that’s fully adjustable. The only real downside is the lack of ports, but you can always opt for the S2725QC to add a built-in USB hub.
If you're not an Apple person, Microsoft's Surface Laptop could be your best bet. Beautifully made, boasting great performance and battery life, and a top-notch keyboard and trackpad with a haptic feedback engine, this laptop compares well with the MacBook Air. With a hefty 33% off for Prime Day, it might be time to give it a try.
The best laptop is consistently priced lower than the competition, and this is the cheapest we've seen it yet. The latest model, launched earlier this year, boasts the M5 chip. The outside hasn't changed much since 2022, but inside the graphics performance is way better thanks to the M5, and there's now support for up to two external monitors.
If you've always fancied creating your own server for backups, local streaming, or other projects, now is the time to bite. Topping the best NAS devices, Synology's excellent two-bay DiskStation DS225+ has everything you need to get started. It's fast, has ports aplenty, and is relatively quiet.
The Netgear Orbi 770 Series simply the best mesh Wi-Fi system for most folks looking to upgrade their home internet speed. This tri-band mesh (2.4-, 5-, and 6-GHz) is easy to set up and use and delivers speedy internet over a wide area. You also get features like MLO (Multi-Link Operation) to enable newer Wi-Fi 7 devices to connect on multiple bands simultaneously. Basic security is built in, but you need to subscribe if you fancy some more advanced features like enhanced security or parental controls.
Every time I spotted a Slush Puppie machine as a kid I got excited, but now you can have your very own countertop slushie machine. I’m reliably informed that it’s the best slushie machine, capable of producing delicious silly frozen cocktails and all manner of soft slushies drinks. Just watch out for the brain freeze!
The Apple Watch Series 11 is by far the best smartwatch for iPhone owners. The headline improvement is 24-hour battery life, which enables proper sleep tracking. You also get clinically validated watchOS health updates, including FDA-cleared hypertension notifications, Apple’s proprietary Sleep Score, and blood oxygen sensing. It’s a polished wrist computer that can genuinely help you stay healthy and is well worth the investment at this discounted price.
Amazon's deep discounts on its own range of devices are always some of the best Prime Day tech deals, and the Kindle Paperwhite is the bench of the bunch. On its own, it's the best e-reader you can buy. There’s an illuminated 7-inch screen, up to 12 weeks of battery life, and smooth performance. The screen is black-and-white, has great contrast, and is very comfortable to read on. Both the Signature and regular versions are on sale, but only the Signature has the auto-adjusting front light and wireless charging.
This incredibly versatile device is one of the best indoor security cameras, with a dual-lens design, combining a regular 4K camera with a 130-degree field of view with a 2K telephoto lens that supports 3x optical zoom. You can pan 360 degrees and tilt 75 degrees, there’s AI tracking with up to four preset positions, privacy mode, two-way audio, and onboard AI to detect people, pets, and sounds. Record locally with a microSD card or HomeBase 3 (both sold separately).
The best robot lawn mower for most people with regular, flat lawns is down to $1,119 if you clip the coupon for 20 percent off on Amazon right now. This compact mower maps your lawn automatically, employing a triple AI camera system, GPS, and 4G to cut your grass accurately in neat lines. The obstacle avoidance is reliable, and it comes with a handy covered charging station. The deal runs through Prime Day, ending on June 26.
It's only $4 off, but if it alerts you to a leak this deal could save your thousands of dollars in water damage. These reliable devices made our best water leak detectors guide because they have four metal probes underneath and two above to swiftly detect water dripping or pooling. Alerts hit my phone as push notifications within one to two seconds and there’s a fairly loud 90-decibel alarm, though you can reduce the volume in the app or even mute it. Just bear in mind, you need a Tapo hub ($23) to connect these with.
With impressive brightness and rich colors, this lightstrip is easily configurable via the Hue app. There are countless animated scenes to choose from, and it syncs with music or your TV screen when paired with a Play HDMI Sync Box. It has special mounts to make it easy to tuck away behind your TV and comes in different lengths for different screen sizes. However, it doesn’t look terrible if you do get a glimpse, thanks to the diffuser.
Why not upgrade your home with 100 feet of outdoor lighting, sporting 60 RGBIC LEDs, at a hefty discount? Like all our favorite Govee smart lights, you can choose colors, brightness, animated scenes, and automation in the jam-packed app. These IP67-rated lights are designed to be permanently attached to the outside of your home for all your holiday celebrations or just classy lighting year-round.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.