Computer Science > Sound
Title:Quality-Diversity Search in Sound Generation: Investigating Innovation Engines for Audio Exploration
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:This study addresses the challenges composers and sound designers face in creating and refining tools to achieve their musical goals. Using evolutionary processes to promote diversity and foster serendipitous discoveries, we automate the search through uncharted sonic spaces for sound discovery, arguing that diversity-promoting algorithms can bridge the gap between the theoretical realisation and practical accessibility of sounds. We describe a system for generative sound synthesis combining Quality Diversity (QD) algorithms with a supervised discriminative model, inspired by the Innovation Engine algorithm, and explore different configurations and the interplay between the chosen synthesis approach and the discriminative model. We examine the interaction between Compositional Pattern Producing Networks (CPPNs) and Digital Signal Processing (DSP) graphs, introducing a novel approach that uses multiple specialised CPPNs for different frequency ranges; this yields simpler networks while maintaining performance comparable to single-CPPN setups. We also investigate evolutionary stepping stones by analysing goal switches between musical and non-musical contexts, revealing how lineages traverse unlikely paths to current elites. Expanding the behaviour space of a previous study to include various sound durations, we uncover specialisation within temporal niches. Results indicate that CPPN and DSP graphs coupled with a Multi-dimensional Archive of Phenotypic Elites (MAP-Elites) and a deep learning classifier can generate a substantial variety of synthetic sounds, diverse and innovative across temporal and contextual dimensions. We present the generated sound objects through an online explorer and as rendered sound files, and, in the context of music composition, an experimental application that showcases their creative potential across various durations and contexts.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.