Our expert, award-winning staff selects the products we cover and rigorously researches and tests our top picks. If you buy through our links, we may get a commission.Reviews ethics statement
15 Horror Movies You Really Need to Stream on HBO Max
Pick out a frightening feature to watch this week.
Meara IsenbergWriter
Meara covers streaming service news for CNET. She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin with a degree in journalism. When she's not writing, she likes to dote over her cat, sip black coffee and try out new horror movies.
If you want to stream a horror movie, you have a ton of platforms to choose from. So why should you spend time sifting through HBO Max?
HBO Max is an excellent choice for frightening films. In addition to the 15 outstanding options you'll find below, you can watch Bring Her Back and The Substance. The streaming service starts at $11 per month, or $110 per year, and you can also bundle HBO Max, Disney Plus and Hulu.
Horrors take place in broad daylight in this haunting film from Ari Aster. Set at a midsummer festival in a remote Swedish village, Midsommar has plenty of disturbing surprises in store for its guests. Prepare for some shocking scenes and a gripping performance from Florence Pugh.
Cara Howe/Warner Bros.
Companion (2025)
Companion is a scary movie you should boot up and watch without much Googling ahead of time. It's clever, unsettling and thrilling, with great performances from Sophie Thatcher of Yellowjackets and Jack Quaid of The Boys. Produced by the filmmakers behind 2022's Barbarian, Companion sets the bar high for 2025 horror films.
Warner Bros.
Weapons (2025)
Amy Madigan won an Oscar for her performance in Weapons. In the mystery-horror movie, 17 kids go missing on the same night at the same time, and no one knows where they went or why. Video footage seems to show that children left their houses on their own. Weapons follows shaken members of the community, including the students' teacher (Julia Garner) and a parent (Josh Brolin).
Warner Bros.
The Conjuring (2013) and The Conjuring 2 (2016)
HBO Max has added The Conjuring: Last Rites, which marks the last appearance of Vera Farmiga and Patrick Wilson as paranormal investigators Lorraine and Ed Warren. But there's nothing to stop you from revisiting the demonologists' earlier exploits in The Conjuring and The Conjuring 2 -- arguably the best films in the franchise.
Warner Bros.
It (2017)
When this adaptation of the classic Stephen King novel hit theaters in 2017, it had moviegoers like me looking twice at storm drains and dreading red balloons. With a cast of intrepid kids and a lot of heart, it makes a compelling case for more supernatural coming-of-age stories. And a strong case against clowns.
Universal Pictures
Get Out (2017)
Jordan Peele's directorial debut scored Oscar nominations for best picture, director and actor, and an Oscar win for best original screenplay. The twisty psychological horror flick stars Daniel Kaluuya as Chris, a Black man who unknowingly steps into danger when he meets his white girlfriend's family.
A24
Heretic (2024)
The inclusion of Hugh Grant may draw you into this religious horror movie, but once you hit play, there's no escaping the creepiness of his character, Mr. Reed. Watch this one if you want to see if a pair of young missionaries are able to outwit their evil captor.
Warner Bros.
Sinners (2025)
Michael B. Jordan takes on two leading roles in this genre-bending film from Ryan Coogler (Creed, Black Panther). Sinners is a box office hit, but if you have yet to spend time with Smoke and Stack (or missed the post-credit scenes in theaters), now's your chance to stream it. The film won four Oscars out of a record-breaking 16 nominations.
Screenshot by CNET
The Witch (2015)
This historical horror movie pretty much guarantees nightmares. The disturbing film centers on a family in 1630s New England and marks Anya Taylor-Joy's film debut. Over the 90-minute flick, strange and shocking things happen to a farmer, his wife and their five children who've relocated to a remote area on the edge of a forest.
Warner Bros.
Evil Dead Rise (2023)
A family accidentally unearths some unimaginable evils in this gory supernatural horror story. It's the fifth entry in the film franchise after The Evil Dead (1981), Evil Dead II (1987), Army of Darkness (1992) and Evil Dead (2013).
Eric Milner/Warner Bros.
Final Destination Bloodlines (2025)
Final Destination Bloodlines is the first film in the franchise in 14 years, and it won't be the last -- another entry with the co-writer of Bloodlines is officially in the works. Bloodlines manages to feel fresh while carrying on the series' well-known elaborate killings, premonitions and efforts to outwit death.
HBO Max/Screenshot by CNET
Night of the Living Dead (1968)
George Romero's first horror film is an easy recommendation. A group of survivors take refuge in a house while members of the undead swarm outside. The influential flick is often regarded as the first modern zombie movie, and while it may not offer Freddy Krueger-level frights, you'll be drawn in by the characters at the center of its story. You're going to want to leave the door open for this one (but in the case of an actual apocalypse, keep it very, very shut).
Libra Films
Eraserhead (1977)
David Lynch's first feature-length film will make you feel like you're in a bizarre nightmare. The 90-minute black-and-white horror flick is packed with odd sounds and imagery, and the result is incredibly eerie. Don't even get me started on the main character's freakish, otherworldly looking "baby" (that's oddly still kind of cute). There are messages about men and parenthood here, but even setting aside the bigger picture, Eraserhead's surreal world is absolutely worth a visit.
Warner Bros.
Beetlejuice Beetlejuice (2024)
The 1988 horror comedy Beetlejuice may not be on HBO Max, but you can catch Michael Keaton's ghost with the most in the 2024 sequel. Winona Ryder and Catherine O'Hara also reprise their roles in the spooky follow-up film.
Watch this: Why We Can't Look Away: The Morbid Fascination with Serial Killers
Meara covers streaming service news for CNET. She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin with a degree in journalism. When she's not writing, she likes to dote over her cat, sip black coffee and try out new horror movies.See full bio