Computer Science > Multimedia
Title:PUMA: Layer-Pruned Language Model for Efficient Unified Multimodal Retrieval with Modality-Adaptive Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:As multimedia content expands, the demand for unified multimodal retrieval (UMR) in real-world applications increases. Recent work leverages multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to tackle this task. However, their large parameter size results in high training costs and low inference efficiency. To address this, we propose PUMA: a Layer-Pruned Language Model for Efficient Unified Multimodal Retrieval with Modality-Adaptive Learning. Our approach improves UMR from both structural and learning perspectives. (1) Structurally, we propose Layer-Pruned Self-Distillation, which prunes MLLMs by keeping only shallow layers while distilling features from dropped deep layers as teacher signals. This reduces parameters and preserves representation capability. (2) On the learning side, we introduce Modality-Adaptive Contrastive Learning Loss (MAC-Loss), which separates in-batch negatives into harder intra-modality and easier inter-modality groups based on the target modality, assigning different temperature strategies to enhance learning efficiency. Experiments show our method significantly reduces resource usage while maintaining strong performance.
Submission history
From: Yibo Lyu [view email][v1] Thu, 10 Jul 2025 16:47:25 UTC (8,511 KB)
[v2] Mon, 28 Jul 2025 13:36:38 UTC (8,362 KB)
[v3] Mon, 1 Jun 2026 15:36:27 UTC (8,425 KB)
[v4] Sat, 6 Jun 2026 18:51:46 UTC (8,425 KB)
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.