Featured in this article
The humble cable is often the simplest and fastest way to charge your devices or move files from one device to another. But these ostensibly straightforward power and data conduits come in many shapes and sizes. Even cables that appear identical may perform differently when you plug them into your phone or laptop. Various connectors, specifications, charging rates, and data transfer speeds make for a confusing, messy scene.
Not to worry, though. I confronted that dreaded box of cables, untangled the cords, and identified the ones you need for various scenarios. Below, you'll find some advice here on USB-C, Lightning, and MicroUSB connectors, as well as a primer on everything you need to know about cables.
Updated June 2026: I’ve added cables from Cable Matters, Satechi, Beats, Statik, Baseus, and TwelveSouth, plus a cable tidy from Oakywood. I’ve also slimmed down my picks, reorganized the entire guide, and updated prices throughout.
Other USB-C Cables I’ve Tested
There are so many cables out there, and plenty of solid options did not make the cut as a top choice. Here are a few honorable mentions I’ve tested and liked.
Statik MagStack Pro for $25: I quite like the automatic magnetic coiling this cable features, as it stays neat, and the colors could be handy if you want something that stands out (I tested the bright orange version). But performance is distinctly average at 100W for charging and 480 Mbps for data transfer. It is 6.6 feet and comes with a two-year warranty.
Baseus 2-in-1 Charging Cable for $25: I love the idea of a single cable that splits into two, allowing you to charge both devices from one USB-C port, but I found this cable’s performance to be unpredictable. You can get up to 140 watts for a single device, but when you split it between two devices, the charging rate drops well below that as a combined total. It’ll work fine if you use it for overnight charging a laptop and a phone, or a pair of phones.
Twelve South PowerCord for $30: While I don’t think we want to go back to a landscape of devices with permanently attached cables and power adapters, they do offer a simplicity that could be useful for some folks or situations. The PowerCord from Twelve South is thick and durable-feeling, with a tangle-resistant woven (4- or 10-foot) USB-C cable attached to a compact 30-watt (power delivery) wall plug.
Smartish Crown Joule 3-in-1 Cable for $20: This clever offering from Smartish packs three connection types into one. It is technically USB-A to MicroUSB, but there's an adapter at the tip that converts it to USB-C or Lightning. It has a durable fabric finish in a choice of four colors and can charge most of your gadgets at top speed (up to 100 watts). WIRED reviews editor Julian Chokkattu has used it to juice up a range of devices, including wireless keyboards and a Fire tablet. It's also MFi-certified for Apple devices.
EcoFlow Rapid Pro for $25: This durable charging cable from EcoFlow is a solid choice for fast charging, thanks to its 240-W capability. It also has tough metal ends, a lovely woven finish, and comes with a cable tie.
Nomad Chargekey for $29 and USB-C Cable for $25: The Chargekey is a handy wee addition to your key ring with 12 cm of braided cable capable of delivering 240 watts and up to 10 Gbps data transfer, though it can be a little awkward to use. I also tried Nomad’s new Kevlar-reinforced USB-C cable, which is also 240 W but only has 480 Mbps data transfer. It feels durable with metal ends and braided cable, but you can get more capable cables for less money.
QDOS PowerMotion Ultra for £40: This USB 4.0 cable is a solid alternative to our top picks for folks in the UK, combining up to 240-watt charging with data transfer speeds up to 40 Gbps. It is relatively thick, feels durable, and comes with a lifetime warranty. I like the braided nylon finish and color-matched cable tie. I also tried the QDOS Powerloop (£20), a handy wearable charging cable that doubles as a lanyard strap. It’s thick, woven, and durable, with screw-off ends that reveal a USB-C cable capable of supplying 60 watts of power and 480 Mbps of data.
Chargeasap Connect Pro for $40: Magnetic-tip cables can be handy for kids and folks with dexterity issues. The idea is you stick the relevant tip in your device and then attach the cable magnetically when you need to charge. This one also has an LED display to show real-time power usage. It works best if you leave the tips in your devices, but that means they can’t be charged by regular cables, and the tips are very easy to lose if you remove them. Performance-wise, it’s a standard 100-watt charging cable.
Krafted Connex for £30: I like the idea of a Swiss Army Knife–style charging cable key ring, but the execution here is flawed. It does offer USB-A, USB-C, Lightning, and MicroUSB, but the flip-out plugs don’t have any cable attached, so they are not very adjustable, making it tough to plug into some ports. The Rolling Square InCharge X 6-in-1 Cable above is about the same price and works far better.
Scosche Strikeline Premium USB-C Cable for $25: This braided cable comes in various lengths, all the way up to the 10-foot cable I tested. It’s a good alternative to my pick for the best long cable above if data transfer is more important to you than charging speed because it offers 5 Gbps data speeds, but only 60 watts for charging.
Ugreen Uno USB-C Cable for $10: I love the smiley-faced Uno line from UGreen, but I assumed the display on this cable would show the charging rate. It does not. It just displays smiley eyes when charging and changes when fully charged. I tested the 6.6-foot cable, but it also comes in 1.6-, 3.3-, and 10-foot lengths. It feels durable and is reasonably priced, but it is rated at a very ordinary 100 watts and 480 Mbps.
Native Union Pocket Cable for $30: This wee braided USB-C to USB-C cable is perfect for slipping on a key ring to ensure you are never caught without a cable. It’s a nice design with braided cables, but you only get around 7 inches, and it maxes out at 60 watts. It’s built to last, constructed from recycled materials, is USB-IF certified, and comes with a lifetime warranty.
Caudabe ChargeFlex for $25: This is a good option for a Lightning cable, but it’s a little more expensive than I’d like. It is a thick braided cable reinforced with Kevlar for durability. There is a leather clip you can use for cable management, and the ridged finish on the connectors makes them easy to grip when unplugging.
Cable Matters Gen 2 USB-A to USB-C cable for $10: This is a good alternative to my top pick for best USB-A to USB-C if you want faster data transfer speeds (it maxes out at 10 Gbps). The trade-off is that it’s limited to 15 watts for charging.
Bluebonnet Eco-Friendly Charging Cable for $25: Bluebonnet (an Austin-based studio named after the Texas state flower) made this cable from naturally biodegradable wheat straw. It promises the ability to survive 50,000-plus bends and uses plastic-free packaging. I love the dappled blue finish and the cream ends, which both look good and are easy to pick out of a tangle of cords. It’s nothing special performance-wise, offering up to 60-watt charging and 480 Mbps data transfer.
RUGD Rhino Power USB-C to USB-C for £11: This is a solid option for folks in the UK seeking a tough cable. It has a braided nylon finish and has been tested to withstand at least 100 kilograms of tension and 100,000 bends. It can also deliver up to 60 watts.
Casetify Powerthru USB-C to Lightning Cable for $22: This tough, braided cable comes in some fun colors (most notably cotton candy).
Iniu Braided USB-C Cable for $10: This is a cheap, 6.6-foot USB-C to USB-C charging cable that tops out at 100 watts. Data transfer is only 480 Mbps. One end lights up green when it’s charging.
Lindy USB 3.2 Type C to C Cable for $22: These active cables are suitable for hooking up monitors to your computer, and they support up to 8K at 60 Hz and 4K at 120 Hz. They also support DisplayPort 1.4. I tested the longer 3- and 5-meter variants that max out at 60 watts for power delivery and 10 Gbps for data (but they’re out of stock). The shorter cable linked here can go up to 20 Gbps. They work well and feel durable, but they’re a bit pricey.
Satechi USB-C to USB-C Charging Cable for $20: Gear from Satechi always has a classy look, and its braided nylon cables are no exception. This one is 6.5 feet and has a Velcro strap. It's also capable of 100-watt charging with support for PD and QC. Sadly, data transfer is limited to 480 Mbps.
Plugable Thunderbolt 4 Transfer Cable for $70: This active Thunderbolt 4 USB-C to USB-C cable matches my top pick with support for 100-watt charging and data transfers up to 40 Gbps. It is 6.6 feet long and comes with a two-year warranty.
Belkin Boost Charge USB-C for $10: This cable maxes out at 12 watts and 480 Mbps. The basic PVC finish is the cheapest, but you can opt for braided nylon ($16). Both come in black or white at 3.3 or 6.6 feet. These cables are USB-IF certified and work as advertised (I've been using one in the car for the last few months).
More Cable Management
TwelveSouth CableStay for $30: A round textured weight finished in silicone, the CableStay will keep your cable handy. It comes with a 5-foot braided cable (in a matching color) that’s capable of delivering up to 60 watts. You can just about fit two cables under it if you need to do so.
Smartish Cable Wrangler for $30: I used this on my desktop for a long time to stop cable ends from disappearing off the back of my desk. It works great with metal connectors, but for some cables, you must attach a special cable collar that sticks magnetically (you get three in the box).
What to Know Before You Buy
Cables are usually included in the box for whatever device you purchase. These are generally capable of charging the device at the maximum rate. Keep it safe, keep it simple, and if it is unmarked, consider labeling it.
Check your device's standards. Look for a cable that matches your needs. For example, if your device supports Power Delivery, then get a PD cable. Remember: The charging adapter also must support the same standards. We have more details about standards below.
You can use USB-C for displays. Manufacturers will state the data transfer speed or list support for 4K or 8K video on select cables. That means you can use a USB-C to USB-C cable to transmit video from your laptop to your monitor. You should consider DisplayPort Alt Mode (DP Alt Mode) support, as this enables you to hook up displays and video sources that support DisplayPort.
It is safe to use your phone while it is charging, but it will charge at a slower rate. Heat is also bad for battery health, so it is best to take a break when your phone feels warm.
Poorly made cables can overheat and start fires. To boost your chances of buying a dependable cable, look for an option with a USB-IF certification (learn more about this below), or stick to trustworthy brands like those in this guide, including Anker, Cable Matters, or Baseus.
Charging Standards and Certification
With various standards and charging technologies at work, it is much harder than it should be to work out what a cable can do. There are a few key points worth knowing when shopping:
USB Standards: The Universal Serial Bus (USB) standard dates back to 1996 but has seen many new standards, revisions, and connector types in the years since. Instead of running through all of them here, I’ll highlight what matters most right now:
Connectors: While USB-C is mercifully becoming a standard connection type, you want cables with connectors that fit your existing devices. Today, that still might mean USB-A, Lightning, or even MicroUSB. Remember that the capabilities of any cable are limited to its oldest connection type.
Data: The data transfer speed is always in megabits per second (Mbps) or gigabits per second (Gbps). The top speed capability of a given cable depends on the standard:
- USB 2.0 supports 480 Mvps
- USB 3.0 supports 5 Gbps
- USB 3.1 supports 10 Gbps
- USB 3.2 Gen 1 supports 5 Gbps
- USB 3.2 Gen 2 supports 10 Gbps
- USB 3.2 Gen 3 supports 20 Gbps
- USB 4.0 supports 40 Gbps
Power: While cable manufacturers always list the maximum charging rate, your device determines how much power to draw, so it's important to know what standards it supports and then combine your cable with the correct power adapter. The charging rate of a cable is measured in watts (W). Sometimes manufacturers will list specifications on the cable in tiny print. If there’s no listed watt rate, you can calculate it by multiplying the voltage (V) and the current (A), assuming those are listed.
Basic USB-C cables are passive and can only carry up to 60 watts. Cables that can carry 100 watts or more—sometimes described as “active” cables—must contain an e-marker chip that identifies the cable and its capabilities.
The Power Delivery (PD) standard is as close as we have to a common standard. A few manufacturers, like OnePlus, Oppo, and Xiaomi, still have proprietary charging standards. Then there's Qualcomm’s Quick Charge (QC), which was the most popular for phones for many years, although Quick Charge 4+ supports PD. Even PD has a variant called programmable power supply (PPS), which is part of the USB PD 3.0 standard. PPS allows for real-time adjustments to maximize efficiency and charge phones, like Samsung's Galaxy S22 range, at up to 45 watts instead of the usual 18. The latest addition to PD is an extended power range (EPR), which allows USB-C cables to carry up to 240 watts (they used to be limited to 100 watts).
Thunderbolt was a proprietary interface developed by Intel and Apple, but it's now open for royalty-free use (still certified by Intel). With Thunderbolt 3, the standard adopted the USB-C connector and is capable of data transfer speeds up to 40 Gbps and can deliver 100 watts of power using the PD standard. Thunderbolt 4 brings various improvements, mostly related to the video signal (support for two 4K displays or an 8K display). It also supports the USB 4 standard and is backward compatible with previous standards. Thunderbolt 5 can double the transfer speed of Thunderbolt 4 and can support three 4K displays or two 8K displays.
Cable Certification: There are a few types of cable certification. When a cable is certified, that usually means it was independently tested and conforms to specific standards. It gives you, as a buyer, peace of mind that your cable performs as the manufacturer claims. Certification can be expensive, so many cable manufacturers shun it, but that doesn’t necessarily mean their cables are poor quality. The USB Implementers Forum (USB-IF) is a non-profit organization dedicated to advancing USB technology. Run by members like Apple, Google, HP, Microsoft, and Intel, it sets specifications and offers certification. If a cable is certified by the USB-IF, it has been tested to ensure it complies with its standards. Apple has its own Made for iPhone (MFi) certification for Lightning cables. Intel certifies Thunderbolt cables. Certified cables usually have the relevant logo on the connector. (For example, Thunderbolt cables have a lightning bolt.)
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.