The last six months in LLMs in five minutes
In this newsletter:
The last six months in LLMs in five minutes
Plus 6 links and 9 quotations and 2 notes and 8 beats
Sponsor message: Accelerate your deployment cycles with Datadog LLM Observability, a unified platform that connects AI behavior with system health. Gain end-to-end visibility into prompts, quality evals, and costs to maximize your AI ROI and ship faster with confidence.
The last six months in LLMs in five minutes - 2026-05-19
I put together these annotated slides from my five minute lightning talk at PyCon US 2026, using the latest iteration of my annotated presentation tool.
I presented this lightning talk at PyCon US 2026, attempting to summarize the last six months of developments in LLMs in five minutes.
Six months is a pretty convenient time period to cover, because it captures what I’ve been calling the November 2025 inflection point. November was a critical month in LLMs, especially for coding.
For one thing, the supposedly “best” model (depending mostly on vibes) changed hands five times between the three big providers.
As always, I’m using my Generate an SVG of a pelican riding a bicycle test to help illustrate the differences between the models.
Why this test? Because pelicans are hard to draw, bicycles are hard to draw, pelicans can’t ride bicycles... and there’s zero chance any AI lab would train a model for such a ridiculous task.
At the start of November the widely acknowledged “best” model was Claude Sonnet 4.5, released on 29th September. It drew me this pelican.
In November it was overtaken by GPT-5.1, then Gemini 3, then GPT-5.1 Codex Max, and then Anthropic took the crown back again with Claude Opus 4.5.
I think Gemini 3 drew the best pelican out of this lot, but pelicans aren’t everything. Most practitioners will agree that Opus 4.5 held the crown for the next couple of months.
It took a little while for this to become clear, but the real news from November was that the coding agents got good.
OpenAI and Anthropic had spent most of 2025 running Reinforcement Learning from Verifiable Rewards to increase the quality of code written by their models, especially when paired up with their Codex and Claude Code agent harnesses.
In November the results of this work became apparent. Coding agents went from often-work to mostly-work, crossing a quality barrier where you could use them as a daily-driver to get real work done, without needing to spend most of your time fixing their stupid mistakes.
Also in November, this happened - the first commit to an obscure (back then) repo called “Warelay” by some guy called Pete.
Over the holiday period, from December to January, a whole lot of us took advantage of the break to have a poke at these new models and coding agents and see what they could do.
They could do a lot! Some of us got a little bit over-excited. I had my own short-lived bout of a form of LLM psychosis as I started spinning up wildly ambitious projects to see how far I could push them.
One of my projects was a vibe-coded implementation of JavaScript in Python - a loose port of MicroQuickJS - which I called micro-javascript. You can try it out in your browser in this playground.
That playground demo shows JavaScript code run using my micro-javascript library, in Python, running inside Pyodide, running in WebAssembly, running in JavaScript, running in a browser!
It’s pretty cool! But did anyone out there needa buggy, slow, insecure half-baked implementation of JavaScript in Python?
They did not. I have quite a few other projects from that holiday period that I have since quietly retired!
On to February. Remember that Warelay project that had its first commit at the end of November?
In December and January it had gone through quite a few name changes... and by February it was taking the world by storm under its final name, OpenClaw.
The amount of attention it got is pretty astonishing for a project that was less than three months old.
OpenClaw is a “personal AI assistant”, and we actually got a generic term for these, based on NanoClaw and ZeroClaw and suchlike... they’re called Claws.
Mac Minis started to sell out around Silicon Valley, because people were buying them to run their Claws.
Drew Breunig joked to me that this is because they’re the new digital pets, and a Mac Mini is the perfect aquarium for your Claw.
My favourite metaphor for Claws is Alfred Molina’s Doc Ock in the 2004 movie Spider-Man 2. His claws were powered by AI, and were perfectly safe provided nothing damaged his inhibitor chip... after which they turned evil and took over.
Also in February: Gemini 3.1 Pro came out, and drew me a really good pelican riding a bicycle. Look at this! It’s even got a fish in its basket.
And then Google’s Jeff Dean tweeted this video of an animated pelican riding a bicycle, plus a frog on a penny-farthing and a giraffe driving a tiny car and an ostrich on roller skates and a turtle kickflipping a skateboard and a dachshund driving a stretch limousine.
So maybe the AI labs have been paying attention after all!
A lot of stuff happened just in the past month.
Google released the Gemma 4 series of models, which are the most capable open weight models I’ve seen from a US company.
Also last month, Chinese AI lab GLM came out with GLM-5.1 - an open weight 1.5TB monster! This is a very effective model... if you can afford the hardware to run it.
GLM-5.1 drew me this very competent pelican on a bicycle.
... though when it tried to animate it the bicycle bounced off into the top and the bicycle got warped.
Charles on Bluesky suggested I try it with a North Virginia Opossum on an E-scooter
And it did this! I’ve tried this on other models and they don’t even come close. “Cruising the commonwealth since dusk” is perfect. It’s animated too.
The other neat Chinese open weight models in April came from Qwen. Qwen3.6-35B-A3B on my laptop drew me a better pelican than Claude Opus 4.7. That’s a 20.9GB open weights model that runs on my laptop!
(I think this mainly demonstrates that the pelican on the bicycle has firmly exceeded its limits as a useful benchmark.)
Here’s that Claude Sonnet 4.5 pelican from September for comparison. The state of the pelican art really has improved a lot in the past six months.
So those were the two main themes of the past six months. The coding agents got really good... and the laptop-available models, while a lot weaker than the frontier, have started wildly outperforming expectations.
Link 2026-05-08 Using Claude Code: The Unreasonable Effectiveness of HTML:
Thought-provoking piece by Thariq Shihipar (on the Claude Code team at Anthropic) advocating for HTML over Markdown as an output format to request from Claude.
The article is crammed with interesting examples (collected on this site) and prompt suggestions like this one:
Help me review this PR by creating an HTML artifact that describes it. I'm not very familiar with the streaming/backpressure logic so focus on that. Render the actual diff with inline margin annotations, color-code findings by severity and whatever else might be needed to convey the concept well.
I’ve been defaulting to asking for most things in Markdown since the GPT-4 days, when the 8,192 token limit meant that Markdown’s token-efficiency over HTML was extremely worthwhile.
Thariq’s piece here has caused me to reconsider that, especially for output. Asking Claude for an explanation in HTML means it can drop in SVG diagrams, interactive widgets, in-page navigation and all sorts of other neat ways of making the information more pleasant to navigate.
I wrote about Useful patterns for building HTML tools last December, but that was focused very much on interactive utilities like the ones on my tools.simonwillison.net site. I’m excited to start experimenting more with rich HTML explanations in response to ad-hoc prompts.
Trying this out on copy.fail
copy.fail describes a recently discovered Linux security exploit, including a proof of concept distributed as obfuscated Python.
I tried having GPT-5.5 create an HTML explanation of the exploit like this:
curl https://copy.fail/exp | llm -m gpt-5.5 -s 'Explain this code in detail. Reformat it, expand out any confusing bits and go deep into what it does and how it works. Output HTML, neatly styled and using capabilities of HTML and CSS and JavaScript to make the explanation rich and interactive and as clear as possible'
Here’s the resulting HTML page. It’s pretty good, though I should have emphasized explaining the exploit over the Python harness around it.
Quote 2026-05-09
WebRTC is designed to degrade and drop my prompt during poor network conditions.
wtf my dude
WebRTC aggressively drops audio packets to keep latency low. If you’ve ever heard distorted audio on a conference call, that’s WebRTC baybee. The idea is that conference calls depend on rapid back-and-forth, so pausing to wait for audio is unacceptable.
…but as a user, I would much rather wait an extra 200ms for my slow/expensive prompt to be accurate. After all, I’m paying good money to boil the ocean, and a garbage prompt means a garbage response. It’s not like LLMs are particularly responsive anyway.
But I’m not allowed to wait. It’s impossible to even retransmit a WebRTC audio packet within a browser; we tried at Discord. The implementation is hard-coded for real-time latency or else.
Luke Curley, OpenAI’s WebRTC Problem, in response to How OpenAI delivers low-latency voice AI at scale
Quote 2026-05-10
One could say in the first quarter-century of my life, that while I was always fascinated by programming, I could never overcome the guilt of not really knowing whether the tool I am building right now isn’t already superceded by some much better implementation someone else has already written 30 or 40 years ago; I could write a TSV-aware search and replace, or I could find out about
awk
and solve that entire class of problems in one fell swoop, for example. My central conceit is that this is a trap. You need to reinvent a couple of wheels to get to the edge of what we know about wheel-making, not a thousand wheels, and not zero; probably four or five is sufficient in most domains, maybe closer to twenty or thirty in the most epistemically rigorous and developed fields like mathematics or computer science. Each wheel you reinvent, and every directed question you ask along the way, will propel you faster to the true frontier than that same amount of time spend in idle study, or even five times that amount.
Andrew Quinn, footnote on Replacing a 3 GB SQLite database with a 10 MB FST (finite state transducer) binary
Quote 2026-05-10
This article was updated after The Times learned that a remark attributed to Pierre Poilievre, the Conservative leader, was in fact an A.I.-generated summary of his views about Canadian politics that A.I. rendered as a quotation. The reporter should have checked the accuracy of what the A.I. tool returned. The article now accurately quotes from a speech delivered by Mr. Poilievre in April. [...] He did not refer to politicians who changed allegiances as turncoats in that speech.
Link 2026-05-11 Learning on the Shop floor:
Tobias Lütke describes Shopify’s internal coding agent tool, River, which operates entirely in public on their Slack:
River does not respond to direct messages. She politely declines and suggests to create a public channel for you and her to start working in. I myself work with river in
#tobi_river
channel and many followed this pattern. Every conversation is therefore searchable. Anyone at Shopify can jump in. In my own channel, there are over 100 people who, react to threads, add color and add context, pick up the torch, help with the reviews, remind me how rusty I am, and importantly, learn from watching. [...]As so often with German, there is a word for the kind of environment: Lehrwerkstatt. Literally: A teaching workshop. The whole shop floor is the classroom. You learn by being near the work. Being a constant learner is one of the core values of the firm.
Shopify wants to be a Lehrwerkstatt at scale and River has now gotten us closer to this ideal than ever. It’s osmosis learning, because it does not require a curriculum, a training plan, or a manager. It just requires everyone’s work to be visible to the maximum extent possible. Everyone learns from each other.
I’m reminded of how Midjourney spent its first few years with the primary interface being public Discord channels, forcing users to share their prompts and learn from each other’s experiments. I continue to believe that the early success of Midjourney was tied to this mechanism, helping to compensate for how weird and finicky text-to-image prompting is.
TIL: Using LLM in the shebang line of a script
Kim_Bruning on Hacker News:
But seriously, you can put a shebang on an english text file now (if you’re sufficiently brave) [...]
This inspired me to look at patterns for doing exactly that with LLM. Here’s the simplest, which takes advantage of LLM fragments:
#!/usr/bin/env -S llm -f
Generate an SVG of a pelican riding a bicycle
But you can also incorporate tool calls using the -T name_of_tool
option:
#!/usr/bin/env -S llm -T llm_time -f
Write a haiku that mentions the exact current time
Or even execute YAML templates directly that define extra tools as Python functions:
#!/usr/bin/env -S llm -t
model: gpt-5.4-mini
system: |
Use tools to run calculations
functions: |
def add(a: int, b: int) -> int:
return a + b
def multiply(a: int, b: int) -> int:
return a * b
Then:
./calc.sh 'what is 2344 * 5252 + 134' --td
Which outputs (thanks to that --td
tools debug option):
Tool call: multiply({'a': 2344, 'b': 5252})
12310688
Tool call: add({'a': 12310688, 'b': 134})
12310822
2344 × 5252 + 134 = **12,310,822**
Read the full TIL for a more complex examplethat uses the Datasette SQL API to answer questions about content on my blog.
Link 2026-05-11 Your AI Use Is Breaking My Brain:
Excellent, angry piece by Jason Koebler on how AI writing online is becoming impossible to avoid, filtering it is mentally exhausting and it’s even starting to distort regular human writing styles.
I particularly liked his use of the term “Zombie Internet” to define a different, more insidious alternative to the “Dead Internet” (which is just bots talking to each other):
I called it the Zombie Internet because the truth is that large parts of the internet are not just bots talking to bots or bots talking to people. It’s people talking to bots, people talking to people, people creating “AI agents” and then instructing them to interact with people. It’s people using AI talking to people who are not using AI, and it’s people using AI talking to other people who are using AI. It’s influencer hustlebros who are teaching each other how to make AI influencers and have spun up automated YouTube channels and blogs and social media accounts that are spamming the internet for the sole purpose of making money. It is whatever the fuck “Moltbook” is and whatever the fuck X and LinkedIn have become. It’s AI summaries of real books being sold as the book itself and inspirational Reddit posts and comment threads in which people give heartfelt advice to some account that’s actually being run by a marketing firm. [...]
Quote 2026-05-11
Your AI coding agent, the one you use to write code, needs to reduce your maintenance costs. Not by a little bit, either. You write code twice as quick now? Better hope you’ve halved your maintenance costs. Three times as productive? One third the maintenance costs. Otherwise, you’re screwed. You’re trading a temporary speed boost for permanent indenture. [...]
The math only works if the LLM decreases your maintenance costs, and by exactly the inverse of the rate it adds code. If you double your output and your cost of maintaining that output, two times two means you’ve quadrupled your maintenance costs. If you double your output and hold your maintenance costs steady, two times one means you’ve still doubled your maintenance costs.
James Shore, You Need AI That Reduces Maintenance Costs
Link 2026-05-11 GitLab Act 2:
There’s a lot going on in this announcement from GitLab about the “workforce reduction” and “structural and strategic decisions” they are making with respect to the agentic era.
They’re “planning to reduce the number of countries by up to 30% where we have small teams”. One of the most interesting things about GitLab is that they have employees spread across a large number of countries - 18 are listed in their public employee handbook but this post says they are “operating in nearly 60 countries”. That handbook used to document their payroll workflows for those countries too - they stopped publishing that in 2023 but the last public version (hooray for version control) remains a fascinating read. Since we don’t know which of those 60 countries have small teams, we can’t calculate how many countries that 30% applies to.
“We’re planning to flatten the organization, removing up to three layers of management in some functions so leaders are closer to the work.” - this isn’t the first announcement of this type I’ve seen that’s trimming management. Coinbase recently announced a much more aggressive version of this: they were “flattening our org structure to 5 layers max below” and “No pure managers: Every leader at Coinbase must also be a strong and active individual contributor. Managers should be like player-coaches”.
In terms of team structure: “We’re re-organizing R&D to create roughly 60 smaller, more empowered teams with end-to-end ownership, nearly doubling the number of independent teams.” I’ve always loved the idea of individual teams that can ship features unblocked by other teams, and it makes sense to me that agentic engineering can increase the capability of such teams. The 37signals public employee handbook used to have a section on working In self-sufficient, independent teams which perfectly captured this for me, I’m sad to see they removed that detail in January 2024!
Tucked away towards the bottom: “We will be retiring CREDIT as our values framework“ - that’s the values framework described on this page: “Collaboration, Results for Customers, Efficiency, Diversity, Inclusion & Belonging, Iteration, and Transparency”. The new values are “Speed with Quality, Ownership Mindset, Customer Outcomes”. The fact that “Diversity” is no longer in there is likely to attract a whole lot of attention, so it’s worth noting that a sub-bullet under Customer Outcomes reads “Interpersonal excellence: individuals who are good humans, embrace diversity, inclusion and belonging, assume good intent and treat everyone with respect”.
Here’s the part of their new strategy that most resonated with me:
The agentic era multiplies demand for software. Software has been the force multiplier behind nearly every business transformation of the last two decades. The constraint was the cost and time of producing and managing it. That constraint is collapsing. As the cost of producing software collapses, demand for it will expand. Last year, the developer platform market used to be measured in tens of dollars per user per month, this year it is hundreds/user/month and headed to thousands. Not only is the value of software for builders increasing, but we believe there will be more software and builders than ever, and we will serve an increasing volume of both.
That very much encapsulates my own optimistic, Jevons-paradox-inspired hope for how this will all work out.
Their opinion on this does need to be taken with a big grain of salt though. GitLab’s stock price was ~$52 a year ago and is ~$26 today, and it’s plausible that the drop corresponds to uncertainty about GitLab’s continued growth as agentic engineering eats its way through their core market.
If your entire business depends on software engineering growing as a field and producing larger volumes of more lucrative seats, you have a strong incentive to believe that agents will have that effect!
Release: llm 0.32a2
A bunch of useful stuff in this LLM alpha, but the most important detail is this one:
Most reasoning-capable OpenAI models now use the
/v1/responses
endpoint instead of/v1/chat/completions
. This enables interleaved reasoning across tool calls for GPT-5 class models. #1435
This means you can now see the summarized reasoning tokens when you run prompts against an OpenAI model, displayed in a different color to standard error. Use the -R
or --hide-reasoning
flags if you don’t want to see that.
Quote 2026-05-12
The thing about 90% of TDMs [Technical Decision Makers] is that they’re motivated primarily by NOT GETTING FIRED. These aren’t people who browser Lobsters or push to GH on the weekend. These are people that work 9 to 5, get paid, go home, and NEVER THINK ABOUT WORK AGAIN. So to achieve all that, they follow secular trends supported by analysts and broad public sentiment. Oh, Gartner said that “AI strategy” is most important? McKinsey said “context” needs to be managed? Well, “Context Engine for AI Apps” is going to be defensible. Buy it.
Mitchell Hashimoto, in a conversation about the design of the Redis homepage
Quote 2026-05-12
Now, if your CEO has never heard the phrase Ralph Loop, oh man, you are less than 30 days away from your next promotion. I’m not even exaggerating. Walk into his office, close the door, and say, hey chief, been experimenting with something. It’s called Ralph Loops. And I think it could change literally everything. And he’s gonna say, what’s a Ralph loop? And you will say, give me $18,000 worth of API credits and I’ll show you. Now you won’t actually do anything, because you can’t do anything. Because nobody can, because nobody knows what they’re doing. But by the time he figures that out, you’ll have a new title, and equity bump. [...]
Talk about automation constantly. Nothing arouses the slumbering capitalists than the mention of automation. Drop names too, bro. Like talk about specific team members you can automate out of existence. Be like, yo, I automated Gary, bro. Tag Gary in the message. Tag him in Slack in a very public channel. Be like, yo, I just automated @Gary. His function has been Ralph Looped. And tag your CEO in the same message. You think you’re getting laid off after that?
Mo Bitar, The Unethical Guide to Surviving AI Layoffs, TikTok
Release: datasette 1.0a29
New
TokenRestrictions.abbreviated(datasette)
utility method for creating"_r"
dictionaries. #2695Table headers and column options are now visible even if a table contains zero rows. #2701
Fixed bug with display of column actions dialog on Mobile Safari. #2708
Fixed bug where tests could crash with a segfault due to a race condition between
Datasette.close()
andDatabase.close()
. #2709
That segfault bug was gnarly. I added a mechanism to Datasette recently that would automatically close connections at the end of each test, but it turned out that introduced a race condition where an in-flight query could sometimes be executing in a thread against a connection while it was being closed. I ended up solving that by having Codex CLI (with GPT-5.5 xhigh) create a minimal Dockerfile that recreated the bug.
Tool: CSP Allow-list Experiment
An experiment that shows that you can load an app in a CSP-protected sandboxed iframe (see previous note) and have a custom fetch()
that intercepts CSP errors and passes them up to the parent window... which can then prompt the user to add that domain to an allow-list and then refresh the page.
I built this one with GPT-5.5 xhigh running in the Codex desktop app.
Quote 2026-05-13
“11 AI agents” is meaningless as a phrase.
If I said “I have 11 spreadsheets” or “I have 11 browser tabs” to do my work, it means about the same thing.
Link 2026-05-13 Welcome to the Datasette blog:
We have a bunch of neat Datasette announcements in the pipeline so we decided it was time the project grew an official blog.
I built this using OpenAI Codex desktop, which turns out to have the Markdown session transcript export feature I’ve always wanted. Here’s the session that built the blog. See also issue 179.
Release: datasette-ip-rate-limit 0.1a0
The datasette.io site was being hammered by poorly-behaved crawlers, so I had Codex (GPT-5.5 xhigh) build a configurable rate limiting plugin to block IPs that were hammering specific areas of the site too quickly.
Here’s the production configuration I’m using on that site for the new plugin:
datasette-ip-rate-limit:
header: Fly-Client-IP
max_keys: 10000
exempt_paths:
- “/static/*”
- “/-/turnstile*”
rules:
- name: demo-databases
paths:
- “/global-power-plants/*”
- “/legislators/*”
window_seconds: 60
max_requests: 60
block_seconds: 20
Quote 2026-05-14
[...] On the interesting side is how fungible programming languages are nowadays. Programming languages used to be LOCK IN, and they’re increasingly not so. You think the Bun rewrite in Rust is good for Rust? Bun has shown they can be in probably any language they want in roughly a week or two. Rust is expendable. Its useful until its not then it can be thrown out. That’s interesting!
Mitchell Hashimoto, on Bun porting from Zig to Rust
Note 2026-05-14
This Mitchell Hashimoto quote about Bun migrating from Zig to Rust reminded me of a similar conversation I had at a conference last week.
I was talking to someone who worked for a medium sized technology company with a pair of legacy/legendary iPhone and Android apps.
They told me they had just completed a coding-agent driven rewrite of both apps to React Native.
I asked why they chose that, given that coding agents presumably drive down the cost of maintaining separate iPhone and Android apps.
They said that React Native has improved a lot over the past few years and covered everything their apps needed to do.
And... if it turned out to be the wrong decision, they could just port back to native in the future.
Like Mitchell said:
Programming languages used to be LOCK IN, and they’re increasingly not so.
Release: datasette-llm-limits 0.1a0
This plugin works in conjunction with datasette-llm and datasette-llm-accountant to let you configure a per-user (or global) spending limit for LLM usage inside of Datasette. Configuration looks something like this:
plugins:
datasette-llm-limits:
limits:
per-user-daily:
scope: actor
window: rolling-24h
amount_usd: 1.00
Tool: QR code generator
Claude helped me build this tool for creating QR codes, for both text/URLs and for connecting to WiFi networks.
Release: inaturalist-clumper 0.1
Part of the infrastructure I use for publishing my iNaturalist sightings on my blog. I’ve been running this in production for a few weeks now, inspiring some iterations on how it works, so I decided to ship a 0.1 release.
You can see an example of the output in this JSON file.
Quote 2026-05-16
[...] in the last 10 years I’ve learned to really love and respect CSS as a technology.
So I decided years ago that I wanted to react to “CSS is hard” by getting better at CSS and taking it seriously as a technology, instead of devaluing it. Doing that changed everything for me: I learned that so many of my frustrations (“centering is impossible”) had been addressed in CSS a long time ago, and that also what “centering” means is not always straightforward and it makes sense that there are many ways to do it. CSS is hard because it’s solving a hard problem!
Julia Evans, Moving away from Tailwind, and learning to structure my CSS
Note 2026-05-16
In preparation for a lightning talk I’m giving at PyCon US this afternoon I decided to figure out how many names OpenClaw has actually had since that first commit back in November.
Thanks to this first_line_history.py tool (code here) the answer, according to the Git history of the OpenClaw README, is:
Warelay → CLAWDIS → CLAWDBOT → Clawdbot → Moltbot →🦞 OpenClaw
Or in detail (the output from the tool):
2025-11-24T11:23:15+01:00 16dfc1a # Warelay — WhatsApp Relay CLI (Twilio)
2025-11-24T11:41:37+01:00 d4153da # 📡 Warelay — WhatsApp Relay CLI (Twilio)
2025-11-24T17:47:57+01:00 343ef9b # 📡 warelay — WhatsApp Relay CLI (Twilio)
2025-11-25T04:44:10+01:00 14b3c6f # 📡 warelay — WhatsApp Relay CLI
2025-11-25T12:48:40+01:00 4814021 # 📡 warelay — Send, receive, and auto-reply on WhatsApp—Twilio-backed or QR-linked.
2025-11-25T13:50:18+01:00 d51a3e9 # warelay 📡 - Send, receive, and auto-reply on WhatsApp via Twilio or QR-linked WhatsApp Web; webhook setup in one command
2025-11-25T13:51:13+01:00 4d2a8a8 # 📡 warelay — Send, receive, and auto-reply on WhatsApp—Twilio-backed or QR-linked.
2025-11-25T14:52:43+01:00 1ef7f4d # 📡 warelay — Send, receive, and auto-reply on WhatsApp.
2025-12-03T15:45:32+00:00 a27ee23 # 🦞 CLAWDIS — WhatsApp Gateway for AI Agents
2025-12-08T12:43:13+01:00 17fa2f4 # 🦞 CLAWDIS — WhatsApp & Telegram Gateway for AI Agents
2025-12-19T18:41:17+01:00 7710439 # 🦞 CLAWDIS — Personal AI Assistant
2026-01-04T14:32:47+00:00 246adaa # 🦞 CLAWDBOT — Personal AI Assistant
2026-01-10T05:14:09+01:00 cdb915d # 🦞 Clawdbot — Personal AI Assistant
2026-01-27T13:37:47-05:00 3fe4b25 # 🦞 Moltbot — Personal AI Assistant
2026-01-30T03:15:10+01:00 9a71607 # 🦞 OpenClaw — Personal AI Assistant
Link 2026-05-17 GDS weighs in on the NHS’s decision to retreat from Open Source:
Terence Eden continues his coverage of the NHS’ poorly considered decision to close down access to their open source repositories in response to vulnerabilities reported to them as part of Project Glasswing.
Now the Government Digital Service have joined the conversation with AI, open code and vulnerability risk in the public sector, published May 14th. Their key recommendation:
Keep open by default. Making everything private adds additional delivery and policy costs, and can reduce reuse and scrutiny. Openness should remain the default posture, with closure used sparingly and deliberately.
While they don’t mention the NHS by name, Terence speaks the language of the civil service and interprets this as a major escalation:
Within the UK’s Civil Service you occasionally hear the expression “being invited to a meeting without biscuits“. It implies a rather frosty discussion without any of the polite niceties of a normal meeting. In general though, even when people have severe disagreements, it is rare for tempers to fray. It is even rarer for those internal disagreements to spill over into public.
If you find this newsletter useful, please consider sponsoring me via GitHub. $10/month and higher sponsors get a monthly newsletter with my summary of the most important trends of the past 30 days - here are previews from January and February and March.