Lovable and Google announced an expanded multiyear collaboration on Wednesday. Lovable, the fast-growing Stockholm vibe-coding startup, has long been a Google Cloud user. Under the new agreement, it will be a much bigger one.
While the companies did not disclose the dollar figure, a person with knowledge of the deal tells TechCrunch it involves a fivefold increase in Lovable’s footprint on Google Cloud, including AI usage. As part of the deal, this individual tells us, Lovable will gain expanded access to both Anthropic’s Claude — the AI model widely used for coding tasks — and Google’s own Gemini models.
The Anthropic piece in particular is interesting. Google invested $10 billion in Anthropic in cash and compute credits in April, promising another $30 billion if Anthropic hits certain performance targets. It made that investment at a $350 billion valuation — just one month before Anthropic raised a staggering $65 billion round that valued the company at nearly $1 trillion. This deal stands to help Anthropic hit those targets, because Lovable is one of Europe’s fastest-growing startups on record. According to Lovable, it crossed $400 million in annualized revenue in February, having added $100 million in a single month with just 146 employees. The company claims that more than half of Fortune 500 companies use its product in some fashion.
The deal also plugs Lovable into several other parts of Google’s ecosystem. Lovable’s new agent will be available through Google Cloud’s enterprise agent marketplace, the Gemini Enterprise Agent Gallery — an arrangement the two companies first telegraphed at Google’s major U.S. cloud conference in April. And to help secure the code that both humans and agents write, Lovable will integrate with Wiz, Google’s biggest ever acquisition at $32 billion, which officially closed in March, a year after it was announced. The integration will allow Wiz to identify and remediate security problems in real time.
By selling Lovable’s agents through Google’s marketplace, the cloud giant says enterprise procurement and billing will be simplified, making it easier for Lovable to land more enterprise customers.
The calculus for Google is simple enough. If it can keep both Lovable and Anthropic growing by attracting deep-pocketed enterprises, the revenue helps fund the $180 billion to $190 billion in capital expenditures Google plans to spend this year. The company is already in the process of selling a record-breaking $85 billion in equity to cover some of that, so only another $100 billion or so to go.