Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:The adaptive nature of confirmation bias
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In this paper, the phenomenon generally classified as confirmation bias is formulated on the space of square-root probabilities (or equivalently, using the structures of quantum probability). In this framework, observations are modelled by matrices, rather than random variables on a probability space. In the problem of binary hypothesis testing, an optimal evidence choice minimises the expected error probability. We show that the resulting optimal choice of evidence leads to a confirmation bias, thus revealing a surprising aspect of rationality that encompasses confirmation bias. Specifically, in sequential evidence sampling, the implicit optimality leads to two remarkable evolutionary advantages, namely, (a) the decision maker requires only the smallest memory capacity, and (b) the error probability can be reduced exponentially in sample size. A complementary approach based on the framework of active inference -- where the decision maker seeks evidence that provides maximum information -- is then considered. The resulting optimal evidence is shown to agree with the one obtained by minimising error probability. Our framework provides an easy-to-implement protocol for an active quantum inference, whereby the optimal evidence choice for making an inference is sought over the space of matrices.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.