I come from a car family, the kind that always had four or five vehicles in various states of “restoration.” Changing your own oil in my house was not only a rite of passage, but a duty—proof that you were self-sufficient and economical and not, as my uncle would say, a “handy-man.” (“I open my wallet and hand over my credit card!” he’d roar.)
Suffice it to say, I changed my own oil for most of my adult life, until about eight years ago, when I bought my first new hybrid SUV. Opening the hood for the first time, I saw an arrangement of black plastic rectangles, not the discrete auto parts I recognized. I didn’t know how to change the oil, and further, I wasn’t sure I wanted to figure it out. I was (and still am) also a working parent, and always appreciate having another chore taken off my plate.
The nearest oil change facility nearest my house turned out to be a Valvoline Instant Oil Change, and I have been going there ever since, for both that same hybrid SUV, and a second one I bought a few years later. Hybrid vehicles require fully synthetic oil, which costs about twice as much per quart as conventional oil, so having the oil changed by a shop is typically worth it when factoring in the labor—especially if you have a Valvoline Instant Oil Change coupon.
Valvoline may be best known for its line of retail automotive products like oil and additives, but it also operates 2,100 US locations of Valvoline Instant Oil Change garages, which perform oil changes at up to 50 percent less than most car dealerships. And faster, too—usually around half an hour in my experience. If you, too, would like to have your oil changed quickly and inexpensively, or get some cash off some quarts of motor oil if you’re still DIY-ing, check out our Valvoline coupons and deals below.
Get $10 Off Full-Service Conventional Oil Change
If you have a basic, non-hybrid vehicle that you drive in normal conditions (infrequent stop-and-go traffic, no towing), you’re in luck—your oil change will already be relatively inexpensive. And it will be even cheaper with this $10 off Valvoline coupon, which includes 5 quarts of Valvoline brand motor oil (diesel quarts may vary), a filter, lube and maintenance check, and tax. Print it out or save it to your phone so you have it next time you’re out and about. Not valid with other offers or customer-supplied oil (at that point, you may as well do it yourself).
Unlock $15 Off with Valvoline Blend Oil Change Coupon
This is the coupon I personally use when I get my oil changed. In fact, I’m printing it out right now! Synthetic and synthetic blend oil are best for hybrid vehicles, luxury vehicles, vehicles subjected to a lot of stop-and-go traffic, trucks that tow things, or any car with an engine that needs a little TLC. Because synthetic oil is engineered to be more consistent and uniform, it provides better temperature stability and cleaning power, leading to less wear-and-tear on an engine. It is also, of course, more expensive than conventional oil, so this Valvoline coupon is for a little more off—$15 as opposed to $10. Like the offer above, this Valvoline coupon is good for up to 5 quarts of Valvoline oil, a filter, lube and maintenance check, and tax.
Save 25% When You Subscribe and Save
When you buy more at Valvoline, you save more. One of the easiest ways to save is to buy in bulk, which is especially cost effective if you have multiple cars or a family with several cars. When you purchase multiples of motor oil, gear oil, or transmission fluid, you’ll receive a bigger discount the more you buy, up to 25% off.
Valvoline Promo Code: $5 Off
Do you change your own oil and shop at a farm store, such as Fleet Farm, Blains, Rural King, Bomgaars, Theisen, Farm King, Quincy, L&M, Runnings, Buchheit, Family Farm & Home, Tractor Supply, or Norby’s? Then you can get a $5 rebate with the purchase of five quarts of any Valvoline Motor Oil or 1 gallon of Premium Blue Heavy Diesel Engine Oil. Limit 3.
Find your Nearest Valvoline Oil Change
There’s a reason Valvoline is basically ubiquitous with the convenient, one-stop oil change spot. With more than 2,100 locations across the country, it’s more than likely there’s a Valvoline within twenty minutes of you. You can even check online—put your location into the map and it’ll populate the nearest locations instantly, so you and your car can hit the road once again. Be sure to check Valvoline’s offers, since there are often several oil change coupons so you can save big on your next Valvoline Instant Oil Change. When you find an offer on the coupon page, text or email, print on your desktop, or save to your mobile wallet so you have it handy for your next discounted oil change.