Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:MeanVC 2: Robust Low-Latency Streaming Zero-Shot Voice Conversion
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Streaming zero-shot voice conversion (VC) has become increasingly popular due to its potential for real-time applications. The recently proposed MeanVC achieves lightweight streaming zero-shot VC, but it has several limitations: its chunk-wise autoregressive denoising doubles the effective training sequence length, conversion quality degrades under small-chunk settings, and its timbre encoder directly relies on reference mel-spectrograms, making it sensitive to reference audio quality. To address these limitations we propose MeanVC 2. We introduce future-receptive chunking (FRC), which explicitly schedules past and future receptive fields across diffusion transformer decoder layers and removes clean-chunk teacher forcing. By incorporating bounded future context, FRC enables stable conversion with a 40 ms chunk size. We further introduce a universal timbre token encoder, which constructs a timbre representation from a global speaker embedding and retrieves fine-grained timbre cues via cross-attention, improving robustness to low-quality references and enhancing zero-shot speaker similarity. Experimental results show that MeanVC 2 significantly outperforms MeanVC, while reducing latency from 211 ms to 110 ms. Audio samples are publicly available. The source code will be publicly released.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.