AppsFlyer, a data analytics company, has secured more than $1 billion in a Series E funding round at a post-money valuation of $2.7 billion, sources familiar with the matter told Axios.
The company is a marketing analytics platform that acts as an independent referee of sorts to track which digital ads actually drive mobile app downloads and in-app purchases. It helps companies measure their return on ad spend while claiming to protect user privacy and block ad fraud.
While AppsFlyer CEO and co-founder Oren Kaniel declined to comment on specific deal details, he did confirm to Axios that Moloco, Google, Meta and Unity each took a minority stake in the San Francisco-based startup.
AppsFlyer’s most recent raise before this was in 2020. With the latest round, the company has now raised $1.3 billion in known funding since its 2011 inception, per Crunchbase.
Previous backers include General Atlantic, Salesforce Ventures 1, Pitango VC, Goldman Sachs and DTCP.
“They believe what we believe: that attribution and measurement must be independent, unbiased and trusted,” Kaniel was quoted as saying of AppsFlyer’s newest investors. “As AI takes over more of how advertising gets bought and optimized, the signals feeding those systems become the most consequential infrastructure in the industry.”
He added that the company is eyeing the public markets, calling the financing “a step on that path.”
So far in 2026, companies in sales, marketing and CRM categories have pulled in around $4.1 billion globally in seed- through growth-stage funding, per Crunchbase data. That puts the space on track to come in roughly flat with or a bit up from the prior three years — when annual funding hovering around the $8 billion mark — though still far below boom-era levels, when sales and marketing investment topped $20 billion. Notably, many of the startups funded in recent quarters have been AI-focused, with many of them offering agentic tools and automation in areas such as sales, marketing and customer experience management.
Related Crunchbase query:
Related reading:
- Sector Snapshot: Sales And Marketing Gets An AI Makeover
- Exclusive: Schematic Raises $6.5M To Help Companies Update Their Pricing Faster And Easier In The AI Era
- Exclusive: Winn.ai Raises $18M Series A For AI-Powered Real-Time Sales Assistant
- AI-Powered Sales Automation Startup Clay More Than Doubles Valuation To $3.1B
Illustration: Dom Guzman
Stay up to date with recent funding rounds, acquisitions, and more with the Crunchbase Daily.