Apple announced iOS 27 on Monday, June 8, at the company's annual Worldwide Developers Conference. The tech giant said the upcoming iPhone software will include an AI-integrated Siri, called Siri AI, and more ways to refine Liquid Glass on your device. Apple also said iPhones dating back to the iPhone 11 lineup will be able to run the software, and the company will release it to the general public this fall.
But Apple's WWDC announcement was focused on the broader ecosystem of Apple devices and features, which meant it wasn't always clear which specific elements were coming to iOS, MacOS or WatchOS. Everything got tossed together in a soup of announcements, so I've broken out the news that's specifically relevant to your iPhone. (If you want to know if your phone will support it, you can check out the iOS 27 compatibility list.)
Whil Apple didn;t give a specific release date for iOS 27, Apple historically releases upcoming major iOS updates shortly after its September hardware event, so I expect the software to be avaialble around then. Developers can download a beta version of iOS 27 now, and Apple will release a public beta version of iOS 27 in July.
An AI-integrated Siri is everywhere
After months of rumors, Apple confirmed at WWDC that iOS 27 will integrate AI into your iPhone's digital assistant Siri. This update is the biggest change in iOS 27, and it will touch seemingly everything on your device.
Almost the entirety of Apple's presentation focused on how Siri AI will be able to help you across your device in different ways. You'll be able to swipe down on your iPhone's Dynamic Island to search or start a conversation with Siri AI. The assistant will also be able to take actions in apps like Messages, Music and Reminders.
Apple wrote online that Siri AI will be available on Apple Intelligence-enabled iPhones, like the iPhone 16 Pro, later this year.
New Siri AI app
Siri was such a big star at WWDC. Apple announced that the personal assistant will also have its own app, available in iOS 27.
"A dedicated app brings together all your conversations in one place, so you can ask a question on your iPhone and pick up where you left off on your iPad," Apple said. "You can also pin conversations for easy access or start a new one."
This turns Siri AI into an AI chatbot similar to ChatGPT and Claude.
Siri comes to your Camera
Apple said its digital assistant will also be in your Camera app with the new Siri Mode in iOS 27. Once you activate this new mode, you'll be able to point your camera at something around you and get information about it on your iPhone.
Updated Image Playground app
With iOS 27, your iPhone's Image Playground app gets an update, which will allow you to create photorealistic images.
Apple introduced its AI-image generator in 2024 when it released iOS 18.2.
Liquid Glass changes
Apple showed off a Liquid Glass slider at WWDC on Monday that lets you change the Liquid Glass elements across your device. You'll be able to make those elements semitranslucent, opaque or something in between.
Apple introduced the Liquid Glass design in 2025 alongside iOS 26. It's the first major visual change on iPhones since iOS 7 in 2013.
Health app supports tracking menopause and perimenopause
Apple said that its Health app's cycle-tracking feature will support both menopause and perimenopause. You'll be able to log symptoms related to both within the app, which will have educational content to help you learn more about your body.
Custom AirPods EQ
With iOS 27, you'll be able to personalize how your AirPods sound by adjusting the lows, mids and highs of the headphones right from your iPhone.
Those are a few of the new features iOS 27 is expected to bring to iPhones this fall. Developers can try these features now, and Apple said public beta testers will get access to the software in July.
For more Apple news, here's everything Apple announced at WWDC 2026.