Statistics > Methodology
Title:Kernel-Based Functional Balancing for Causal Inference with Compositional Treatments
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We study causal effect estimation with compositional treatments, where the exposure lies on a simplex and the estimand is defined over compositions rather than scalar or binary values. By considering a projection of the average potential outcome onto the treatment space, a kernel-based covariate functional balancing approach is adopted for weight construction. The weights are obtained by directly minimizing a worst-case balancing error over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) defined on the joint space of treatments and covariates, instead of being estimated under a treatment assignment model. Building on these weights, an augmented weighted estimator (AWE) is proposed, where the outcome function is estimated via kernel ridge regression and combined with a marginal augmentation over the covariate distribution. Despite the complex structure of the resulting objective, a finite-dimensional convex optimization problem is formulated via a representer theorem and a low-rank approximation. The proposed estimator achieves $\sqrt{n}$-consistency without requiring consistent estimation or smoothness of the weights. An asymptotic normality result is established around a sample-specific target. Empirical performance is demonstrated through simulation studies and a real data application.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.