Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:Less is More: Lightweight Prompt Compression for Question Answering Applications on Edge Devices
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In agent-driven question answering (QA) applications, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is commonly introduced to enhance the response accuracy of large language models (LLMs) by providing additional context. Due to the inherent noise in retrieval results and the coarse granularity of document-level retrieval, the retrieved context often contains substantial redundant information. In this setting, the agent prompt, consisting of the user query and the associated retrieved context, leads to unnecessary computational overhead during LLM inference. Existing prompt compression methods typically rely on auxiliary small language models (SLMs) to estimate context importance. However, such approaches introduce significant memory and computational overhead, which limits their deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. In this paper, we propose CORE, a two-stage sentence-level prompt compression method that eliminates the need for SLMs. In the first stage, CORE constructs an answer set via named entity recognition (NER) and a clue set via semantic matching. In the second stage, CORE refines the clue set using an orthogonal residual retrieval strategy and designs a spatial proximity-based metric to filter the answer set. The two sets are then combined to form the final compressed context. We implement CORE on an NVIDIA Jetson AGX Orin edge device and a Huawei Nova smartphone. Experimental results demonstrate that within a 2000-token budget, CORE improves accuracy by at least 30.19% compared to state-of-the-art baselines, while reducing memory usage by at least 50.47% and achieving at least 1.94 times speedup on the edge device. Moreover, compared to the state-of-the-art LLMLingua2 method, CORE achieves a substantial energy reduction of 95.74% on the smartphone, highlighting its practicality and generalizability for mobile deployments.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.