Android 17 is rolling out for Pixel devices, but the agentic capabilities, such as intelligent auto-fill and other features we saw at last May's Google I/O conference, won't show up until later this year. Nonetheless, there's still plenty to look forward to. We've previewed many of the features already, including the ability to create your own widget and the redesign emoji, but you'll soon be able to try them out for yourself on your Pixel.
Big new features, like Gemini Intelligence, will be released later this summer and qualifying Android devices will get in on the Android 17 action later this year.
Google's Android releases have undergone a drastic change over the past few years, and the earlier release window is significant. Not only do older Pixel devices get access to the latest version of the OS before the expected new Pixel devices later this year, it also is notable from a competitive standpoint. Google announced several of these features barely a month ago, and some are already beginning to trickle out. Now compare that to Apple's WWDC announcements from last week -- and we'll need to wait until next fall to see any of those new features.
Here are some of the latest updates that are coming to Pixel devices, starting today, and here's what's to come later this year.
Bubble any app for supercharged multitasking
In previous versions of Android, Google allowed you to "bubble" messaging apps in groups, so you had a floating bubble on your home screen for easy access to your most-used chat apps. Now, Google is opening the floodgates and "bubbles" for any app to the home screen.
You can now long-press an app on the home screen, tap the bubble icon and it will be added to a floating icon you can move around as you see fit. And when you want to access said apps, you can just tap on the bubble and the apps you've selected will appear in a smaller window, ready to go.
If you're using a foldable, the bubble menu will look a little different with bubbles docked to a dedicated space on the bottom of the screen. You can resize the apps as you choose. This is perfect for quick access to apps you open frequently.
Foldable gameplay enhancements
Foldable devices are getting a lot of love in Android 17, and gaming is an area that Google had spent some time on. Foldables, like the Google Pixel 10 Pro Fold, will now have a new layout with an optimized 50/50 display: half game, half controller. The new game view lets you leave the physical controller at home and game on the go with the built-in onscreen gamepad.
The new feature will be available in the coming months and if you opt for a physical controller, it will now have native controller remapping -- an essential feature for gamers who want to get exactly what they want out of their gaming experience.
Google also says it reduced frame drops and stutters during gameplay by making memory cleanup more efficient for high-definition gaming.
New safety and security features
While not as flashy as new gaming enhancements or bubbled apps, Google is doing the good work by adding more security enhancements to your phones.
You can now grant temporary access to your precise location instead of permanently having to give an app that permission. Additional controls allow you to limit sharing to only specific contacts rather than all of them.
Google has also enhanced the "Mark as lost" feature in Find Hub so that it requires biometric data in case a thief has access to your passcode.
That's not all, either. The latest update added improvements to Live Threat Detection and more apps and scams will be blocked. Google says that Advanced Protection mode will keep you even safer from sophisticated threats. It's also reduced the number of times someone can guess your passcode and extended wait times after failed attempts.
Reaction videos in Instagram
Creating your own reaction video is easier than ever, and no longer requires an intensely involved process of downloading a video, filming yourself and editing the two together. You can now record both your phone's screen and your reaction using your front-facing camera. It's like having a virtual green screen built into your selfie camera.
What else is on the way in Android 17? Have a look at what's to come later this year.
Gemini Intelligence
During Google I/O, Google said that the shift of Android being an operating system versus an intelligence system comes down to some serious Gemini smarts. Gemini Intelligence is a "system that learns and works for you."
It would have been a surprise if Google hadn't introduced a nice helping of agentic AI to do things on your behalf, and that's exactly what it's delivering. Agentic AI, in essence, is the ability to offload tasks and let your AI chatbot do them on your behalf. And it's significant that Google wants to do this with the most personal device you own, because the results could truly show how AI could improve our lives and save us time.
You can ask Gemini to schedule an appointment with a highly rated dentist, book other appointments and pull up your driver's license information when you need to fill out a form that requires it.
Here are a few more highlights of what you'll be able to do with Gemini Intelligence in Android 17 and beyond in the near future.
Material Expressive updates
Google introduced a more animated, flamboyant version of Material Design last year -- and in 2026, it's adding refinements to Gemini. For Android 17, Google's AI is designed to melt into the background and surface only when you need it.
When you're interacting with the AI chatbot, you'll now see visual cues when it's thinking, listening or working on your behalf. The visual updates are meant to attract attention to what's important rather than be distracting.
While the new Material Expressive updates are more than some design refinements, we think they look great. From what we've seen so far, the overall design feels very intentional. It's not flashy or over the top -- there's no sense of form over function. Instead, it strikes a balance between the two, using subtle visual cues only when needed to communicate specific actions or processes.
Chrome Auto Browse
Chrome Auto Browse is coming to Android in late June. You'll be able to ask Gemini to do things like plan a party, book appointments and locate hard-to-find or out-of-stock items on your behalf.
Intelligent Auto-fill
Autofill isn't new to Android 17 -- or to most operating systems, for that matter. But Google is now bringing AI into the feature. Gemini can automatically fill in more complex information, like passport numbers or license plates, across Android apps and Google Chrome with a single tap. From the user's perspective, the experience looks largely the same. What's changed is the intelligence powering it behind the scenes.
Create My Widget
Widgets have been available for Android 1.5 Cupcake, and they've just received an interesting AI upgrade. You can now ask Gemini to generate a custom widget using information it already knows about you.
From the preview we saw, these widgets don't appear to be tied to any one specific app. Instead, they're designed to surface the kinds of information you'd typically ask Gemini for, updating automatically right from your home screen. For example, you could ask Gemini to provide three easy, high-protein meal-prep recipes each week, and have those suggestions refresh automatically in a dedicated widget.
We'll need to get some proper hands-on time before we can make any real judgments on the feature, but it could serve as a helpful widget option in the thousands already available.
Redesigned emoji
Google has redesigned 4,000 of its own emoji, bringing a touch of realism and more visual flair. The new emoji designs will roll out later this year across Gboard, YouTube and Gmail. The examples Google showed off -- including a bowl of ramen -- featured noticeably more detail, making it easier to distinguish things like noodles from toppings. Basically, they're higher-definition emoji.
Device switching
Google's been working on making the switch to Android even easier, and its latest efforts will make you feel right at home when you finally take the plunge away from other phone ecosystems such as iOS. CNET video producer Carly Marsh had a horrible time getting her iPhone data to transfer onto her Android-powered Motorola Razr last year -- so this is a welcome update.
Now, your home screen shortcuts will be added during the transfer process. This will not only make the transition easier but also save you time from having to start your home screen over from scratch.
In addition to home screen updates, the new transfer process will carry your saved passwords over, too.
New Instagram features
You have an assortment of new Instagram features to look forward to when they arrive on Android. Through a partnership with Meta, Android devices will get true Ultra HDR photo and video support, native video stabilization and the ability to use night mode directly within the Instagram app. Google says that flagship Android devices can now match or best the leading competitor, which, of course, is the iPhone.
Exclusive on-device editing features
That's not all for Instagram. Android will soon receive exclusive editing features, including Smart Enhance, which can restore details from blurry photos or videos. There'll also be a new audio feature that separates sound into individual tracks, letting you boost certain elements or remove them entirely.
Rambler in Gboard
Google's own Gboard keyboard is easily one of the best options for text-to-speech on Android, but it's received updates that make it even better. The aptly-named Rambler is here to make speech-to-text smarter than ever.
Instead of dictating exactly what you say, it'll now understand the context and adjust accordingly. During a demo we were shown, a Google rep began dictating a list of items for a grocery list in a text message. As they were listing the items, they backtracked and said, "Actually, no, I don't need bananas."
Gboard understood what they meant and listed all of the items on the list, leaving bananas out. After that, they asked it to make the list bullet-style and to add a corresponding emoji to each of the items. Gboard got to work and added the adjustments with no fuss or errors.
Expanded Quick Share
Recently, Google has been expanding its Quick Share functionality, with the latest addition being its compatibility with Apple's AirDrop. That compatibility will be extended to even more Android phones in the near future. However, compatibility requires certain hardware, so even if your Android phone isn't compatible, it might still work in some apps, such as WhatsApp.
Pause Point
A new Digital Wellbeing feature, Pause Point, allows you to label specific apps as "distracting." When opening one of those labeled apps, you'll be greeted with a blocker. This isn't just an app timer, though.
Pause Point presents options for you to do something instead of opening the distracting app, such as a breathing exercise or photos to flip through instead. Additionally, you can set a specific app timer for the existing session you're using the app for.
Android 17 is becoming smarter than ever, pushing AI into more practical, proactive roles that go beyond what most people are used to today. And when Google's reimagined "Intelligence System" arrives later this year, the company may finally live up to the name.