Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:A Surface-based Multimodal Framework for Multitask Analysis in Alzheimer's Disease
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, and longitudinal analysis is critical for early detection and effective intervention. Developing models capable of multimodal and multitask analysis enables a more comprehensive understanding of AD progression. However, multimodal learning remains challenged by cross-modal misalignment, non-Euclidean surface representations of cortical data, and limited data availability in small-sample clinical settings. In this work, we propose an augmented spherical data-driven multimodal framework for multitask AD analysis. A spherical diffusion model is first trained to generate paired cortical thickness and Tau PET Standardized Uptake Value Ratio (SUVR) data, enabling structurally consistent multimodal augmentation on cortical surfaces while preserving anatomical correspondence. The augmented data are subsequently used to train a contrastive learning model that learns aligned and fused cross-modal representations. This design strengthens multimodal integration and encourages more balanced representation learning. The learned imaging features are further integrated with tabular cognitive assessments and demographic variables, and processed using an in-context learning model to perform both classification and regression tasks without task-specific fine-tuning. Experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset ($n = 802$) demonstrate consistent performance improvements across five diagnostic and longitudinal tasks, outperforming six baseline models.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.