Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Multi-Modal Multi-Agent Robotic Cognitive Alignment enabled by Non-Invasive Consumer Brain Computer Interfaces: A Proof of Concept Exploration
View PDFAbstract:While non-verbal behaviors and expressive movements are essential for natural human-robot interaction, existing methods often overlook a crucial element: the human's internal cognitive state. Frequently, proactive multi-agent systems can interrupt humans at inopportune moments, leading to cognitive overload and decreased task performance. This paper introduces a framework for generating "cognitively aligned" multi-agent interactions, enhancing the ability of robotic systems to contextually defer communications to the user of an agent system during moments of high human mental workload and engagement. We present the design and implementation of a closed-loop architecture that explores the interplay between autonomous task execution and real-time neurophysiological focus. Using a consumer-grade Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), our approach continuously monitors Electroencephalography (EEG) spectral band powers while a human performs an engagement-inducing task. We propose an engagement-driven pipeline where an HTTP-based signaling mechanism places a primary agent's sensory inputs and audio outputs into a holding state upon detecting high engagement. This allows secondary agents to seamlessly process complex, delegated tasks in the background. Once the human's cognitive state returns to a lower cognitive load baseline, the primary agent releases the queued agent message. Our preliminary results demonstrate the feasibility of leveraging real-time signal processing, Large Language Models (LLMs), and physical robotic embodiments to create cognitively-aware, non-intrusive multi-agent systems.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.