CNET's deals team and I are always looking to bring you the best discounts from your favorite retailers, like Amazon and Walmart. With the Prime Day sale event creeping up on us, we're seeing quite a few early discounts secretly drop. It can be tricky trying to decide if an offer is a real steal or just retailer fluff, especially during a sale event. We rounded up the standout discounts our CNET shopping experts actually recommend this week, including savings on tech, home essentials and everyday favorites.
Our CNET Deals text subscribers get these deals sent to them before anyone else does. I'll send the best deals straight to your phone, so you can keep an eye on the hottest drops and jump on them before everyone else does. And it's completely free. It's never a bad time to save money, and finding affordable items in 2026 is more welcome than ever. Signing up for the CNET Deals text group is safe and trusted, plus you can opt out anytime.
TECH DEALS OF THE WEEK
Deals are selected by the CNET Group commerce team, and may be unrelated to this article.
Best Deals Under $30, Outdoor Party Edition
If you're gearing up for a weekend get together and it's going to be outside, there are some fantastic deals this weekend that will more than make a difference. And best of all, each one of these party deals are under $30.
If you've got any kind of food outside on a hot Summer for more than a few minutes, you know flies are what happens next. These fans have bright, shiny blades that spin in an unusual way to keep flies away. Four of these for $30 is a steal, and will make you the savior of the next barbecue.
I love these small, battery-powerd fans. You can put them basically anywhere, and the battery will provide a breese for hours and hours. This one is $25 today, which is one of the better prices you will see for this type of fan right now.
Hang up these solar lanterns in the backyard and never think about them again. They soak up the sun, and give you a nice, gentle flickering light in the evening. Grab these while they're cheaper, you will be happy you did.
Best deals of the week
The SKG H5 mini heated neck and traps massager has 6D rotating massage nodes that are designed to mimic the feel of hand kneading. The adjustable heat settings help soothe sore muscles. The cordless, rechargeable design gives you up to 90 minutes of use, and the backpack-style straps keeps it hands-free.
This front-and-rear dash cam features 4K recording, so you can see every detail. It also comes with 64GB of storage to keep all your recordings. Plus, the built-in G-sensor is designed to detect collisions, abrupt events and minor impacts.
These earbuds have powerful 11mm drivers that deliver deeper bass and clearer sound. Adaptive 45 decibel active noise cancellation automatically adjusts to your surroundings for a more immersive listening experience. You also get over 40 hours of total battery life, fast charging, dual-device connectivity and low-latency gaming support, plus exclusive ChatGPT integration for Nothing phone users.
Made specifically for car window mounting, the Wyze window camera uses a glare-reducing design and upgraded Color Night Vision to capture clearer footage through glass, even in low light. It offers AI-powered motion alerts, 24/7 local recording with a microSD card, Bluetooth setup and support for Alexa and Google Assistant.
The Amazon smart thermostat works with Alexa to create schedules, adjust temperatures automatically and let you control your home's temp from anywhere through the app. It is Energy Star certified and compatible with select Alexa devices. Plus, DIY installation makes setup relatively easy.
This handheld fan doubles as a desktop fan, thanks to an included USB-C charging dock. It features 100 adjustable speed settings, an oversized seven-blade design for smooth airflow and a built-in cooling plate. With up to 16 hours of battery life, a foldable design and a detachable lanyard, it's perfect to take anywhere all summer.
How we choose the deals at CNET
Many of us at CNET have covered shopping events for over five years, including Black Friday, Prime Day, Memorial Day and countless others. Not to mention covering, researching and hunting deals on the daily. We've gotten good at weeding out scams and superficial deals, so you see only the best offers from all over.
When choosing deals to show you, we look for real discounts, quality reviews and remaining sale time. Our team of experts has tested countless products to ensure we're only sharing the best deals.
- Real discounts mean exactly that. We look at the price history for that product to make sure no brands are inflating prices to make the discount seem more substantial than it is.
- Quality reviews and in-depth testing are important for any product. If you're unhappy the first time you use it, the discount wasn't a worthwhile one.
- Remaining sale time is a huge part of our vetting process. If a deal seems like it will only be around for a short while or will only be available for the remaining stock, we'll let you know upfront so you don't come back to the deal later only to be disappointed.