Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:HIPIF: Hierarchical Planning and Information Folding for Long-Horizon LLM Agent Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:While Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities as autonomous agents across a wide range of tasks, their performance often degrades in multi-turn long-horizon agentic tasks. Existing methods have made progress through fine-grained credit assignment to alleviate long-horizon sparse rewards and hierarchical reinforcement learning to decompose tasks and reduce long-term dependency. However, these methods still do not directly address long-context interference, in which continuously growing histories weaken the agent's ability to track the global task state and impair subsequent reasoning and decision-making. Inspired by the way humans handle complex tasks through subgoal decomposition and completed progress summarization, we propose Hierarchical Planning and Information Folding (HIPIF) for long-horizon LLM agent learning. HIPIF trains the agent end-to-end to organize long-horizon execution around explicit subgoals while folding completed subgoal histories to reduce long-context interference. Furthermore, to stabilize subgoal-based planning and execution, HIPIF combines hierarchical reflection and subgoal-oriented process rewards to guide subgoal generation, transition, and execution, without relying on costly auxiliary models or task-specific expert trajectories. Extensive experiments on three publicly available agentic benchmarks demonstrate the validity of our method.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.