Computer Science > Robotics
Title:OMG: Omni-Modal Motion Generation for Generalist Humanoid Control
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Humanoid whole-body control has made significant progress in recent years, yet existing approaches remain limited to few-skill policies with heavy reward engineering, or motion trackers that are difficult to extend to new input modalities. We argue that the key to general-purpose humanoid control is to build a scalable brain, a module capable of reasoning with diverse conditioning modalities, atop a reactive motion tracking cerebellum, mirroring the hierarchical structure of biological motor systems. Two challenges arise in realizing this vision: acquiring a vast amount of high-quality data to achieve general purpose control, and equipping the generator with the capability to condition on compositional, extensible multi-modal inputs. We present OMG, which addresses these challenges with a meticulous data curation, filtering and labeling pipeline, as well as a diffusion-based motion generation backbone that conditions on language, audio, and human reference motions. Extensive experiments validate OMG as an omni-modal whole-body controller exhibiting state-of-the-art performance, model scaling behavior and efficient adaptation to new distributions and modalities, marking a concrete step toward foundation models for humanoid robots.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.