Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:Harnessing Agent Skills: Architectural Patterns and a Reference Architecture for Skill-Mediated LLM Agents
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Agent skills externalise reusable agent-facing behavioural knowledge and guidance as persistent artefacts that can be discovered, activated, and interpreted by LLM agents. Although a skill artefact is static at rest, its architectural responsibilities arise in use, when the artefact is selected for a run, bound to context and authority constraints, interpreted by a stochastic agent, and recorded as run evidence. We call this run-specific relation skill-in-use. This paper studies agent skill harnessing: the architectural responsibilities that govern the transition from skill artefacts to skill-in-use, bound the executable consequences associated with skill-in-use, and capture evidence for attribution, verification, repair, and evolution. This paper provides a catalogue of ten empirically grounded architectural patterns (five core, five supporting) for skill harnessing and synthesises them into a reference architecture with four responsibility layers: Supply Chain, Mediation, Execution Control, and Evidence & Feedback. We evaluate the architecture through cross-instantiation across 8 selected systems. The resulting patterns and reference architecture provide a vocabulary and diagnostic frame for analysing skill-harnessing responsibilities across agent systems.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.