Hoka running shoes have been popular with trail and mountain runners (or “skyrunners”, if you prefer) since the company’s inception in 2009. But it was only during the Covid-19 pandemic that we all threw fashion out the window and became obsessed with these insanely puffy, comfy shoes. The iconic, everyday Cliftons are the most popular model, but we also like the Speedgoat series for trail running and the Anacapa hikers for more rugged terrain. Check out our Hoka coupon code for more money off some of our favorite running shoes.
Get 10% Off Your Next Order With Hoka Coupon Code
Hoka wants to reward you for purchases you’re already making (for yourself or the runner in your life). When you join the Hoka membership, you’ll get 10% off your next purchase. All you need to do is sign up with your email online, and a unique, single use Hoka coupon code will be sent via email after you register. Just copy and paste the special code for savings on your favorite sneakers.
Unlock a Hoka Discount Code For Free Expedited Shipping
If you’ve never bought Hokas before (and if not, why not?), new customers get free expedited shipping on the first order when they sign up for emails and texts. It’s worth noting here that this Hoka promo code only applies if you are a new customer and you need to register both your email address and your phone number for texts to receive the Hoka coupon code.
To get the Hoka discount code, enter your email address in the pop-up window, and then your mobile phone number. To subscribe, reply Y. Another text will be sent, with a single-use code for free expedited shipping. You can then receive notifications of new shoe releases, limited edition styles, and flash sales. (The all-new Kaha 2 Frost Moc is waterproof for what promises to be a very wet winter for some of us.)
Save up to 30% on Our Favorite Hoka Running Shoes
Don’t know which shoes to buy? Let us help you out. Hoka regularly offers up to 30 percent off on its bestsellers (check out the rotating markdowns here).
Take advantage of these Hoka discount codes and hit the trails. Some of the best Hoka deals we’ve seen recently are 30% off Speedgoat 6 trail running and hiking shoes at $47 off, now $108; 20% off the Mach 6, a solid pair of everyday running shoes at $28 off; and 20% off the Clifton 10, another popular everyday running or walking tennis shoe, now $31 off (only $124 total). Plus, you can get 20% off the Bondi 9, another uber-popular everyday running or walking shoe at $35 off, and a whopping 30% off Transport hiking/walking shoes at $45 off.
Save 10% on Your Next Pair of Hoka Clifton 10s
If you’re an avid runner or just want to upgrade your footwear this season, investing in a Hoka membership (more on that below) is the best way to save on future purchases longterm. A Hoka membership will get you 10% off bestselling shoes, like Hoka Clifton 10 womens and Hoka men's Clifton 10 styles.
Get 30% Off Hoka Outlet Sale
One of the best ways to save big is with the short-lived Hoka Outlet. This is a limited run, open exclusively for Hoka newsletter subscribers. If you sign up now to receive Hoka newsletters, you’ll be able to get up to 30% off selected styles for the outlet sale. Just know that this Hoka discount is for selected styles only, and ends September 20.
Hoka Members Get Free Shipping and Extended Returns
If you opt to join Hoka’s free membership program, you automatically receive free standard shipping on every order and you’ll automatically qualify for free shipping if you’re logged into your account.
More Hoka Membership Perks
Hoka’s guaranteed “Fly for 30” program means that everyone who buys a pair of Hoka shoes gets a 30-day trial. You can then return the shoes or exchange them for a different size, style, or color. However, Hoka members get access to the Fly for 60 program, which is an extended 2-month guaranteed return window.
You also get access to Hoka’s exclusive events, run clubs, and sweepstakes (check to see if your city is a featured city here). You will also be the first to hear about new promotions and discounts.
Don’t Miss 10% Off Hoka Trail Shoes
As mentioned, if you’re an avid runner, Hoka’s membership is a great way to save big on purchases you were already going to make. With a Hoka membership, you’ll get 10% off bestselling styles, from the Hoka Speedgoat 7 for the trailrunner, to the hiking Transport 2, there’s a Hoka shoe for every type of terrain and runner (now for less!).
Find Your Perfect Hoka Match
Not sure which Hoka shoe to get or where to start? Try the Hoka Shoe Finder! It’s a questionnaire that helps you find the right shoe out of their immense catalogue. It starts with questions about shoe size and gender, then moves on to specifics, because they design Hoka shoes with specialized technology for different activities, you’ll need to discuss activities, weather conditions where they’ll be used most, types of activities, and more to find the very perfect shoe for you.