Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge. That purple category wants you to find related words hidden within four other words, and the only way I could solve the puzzle was by getting the other three color groups first. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Yum, savory.
Green group hint: Tinkling the ivories.
Blue group hint: You might subscribe to one.
Purple group hint: Find a hidden word.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Umami-rich foods.
Green group: Things a beginner might learn on the piano.
Blue group: Starting with magazines.
Purple group: Ending in synonyms for "aggregate."
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is umami-rich foods. The four answers are miso paste, Parmesan, soy sauce and Vegemite.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is things a beginner might learn on the piano. The four answers are Chopsticks, Für Elise, Heart and Soul and The Entertainer.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is starting with magazines. The four answers are fortune cookie (Fortune), people person (People), Spinderella (Spin) and time machine (Time).
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is ending in synonyms for "aggregate." The four answers are coincidentally (tally), dim sum (sum), teetotal (total) and viscount (count).
Quick tips for Connections
#1: Say the clue words out loud, pausing before and after each. That helps you hear the words in the context of a phrase. The Connections editors love to group words together that are used in similar phrasing, like ____ Up.
#2: Don't go for the obvious grouping. These editors are smart. Once, they offered SPONGE, BOB, SQUARE and PANTS in the same puzzle. None of those words were in the same category. If you like, hit the "shuffle" button to give yourself a different perspective on the words.
#3: Break down any compound words and look for similarities. "Rushmore" was once in a puzzle where the connection was that each word started with the name of a rock band.