Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Content-Induced Spatial-Spectral Aggregation Network for Change Detection in Remote Sensing Images
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The integration of spatial and spectral information is beneficial to the improvement of change detection performance. However, existing methods cannot efficiently suppress the influences of spatial and spectral differences in unchanged areas. To address these issues, in this paper we propose a content-guided spatial-spectral integration network (CSI-Net) for the fusion of global spatial details and spectral difference information. Specifically, the proposed CSI-Net is composed of a spatial reasoning (SR) module, a spectral difference (SD) module, and a content-guided integration (CGI) module. In the SR module, the spatial information is learned by cascaded graph convolution blocks for global modeling. The SD module is responsible for the extraction of spectral features, by calculating the means and variances of features to reduce the impact of spectral differences in unchanged regions. In addition, in order to integrate the spatial-spectral features efficiently, we design a CGI module to further take advantage of their complementary information. In this module, high-level content information is introduced as a guide for a proper interaction. Due to the efficient spatial-spectral fusion, the proposed CSI-Net can learn the changed features better while achieving a suppression of spectral differences. Experimental results on LEVIR-CD, WHU-CD, and CLCD datasets demonstrate that the proposed CSI-Net produces better performance compared to state-of-the-art methods, and is applicable to different scenarios
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.