Physics > Computational Physics
Title:REMAL: Residual Equilibrium Manifold Active Learning for Surrogate-Based Multidisciplinary Design Analysis
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Multidisciplinary design analysis of coupled engineering systems requires the computation of equilibrium states in which all disciplinary coupling variables are mutually consistent. Conventional fixed-point iteration resolves this consistency problem separately at each design point, which can become expensive when disciplinary evaluations are costly and many analyses are required in outer-loop tasks such as multidisciplinary design optimization, uncertainty quantification, or digital twin updating. This paper introduces REMAL, a residual manifold surrogate modeling framework for coupled systems. Instead of approximating each discipline independently or directly learning converged coupling variables, the proposed method learns a surrogate model of the joint residual manifold via multitask Gaussian process models. An entropy-based active learning strategy selects additional residual evaluations near uncertain zero-contour regions, and equilibrium states for new design inputs are recovered by solving a nonlinear least squares optimization problem using only the trained surrogate. The method is evaluated on four engineering coupled system benchmarks: a satellite model, an aerostructural model, a finite-element gas-turbine heat-transfer and economics model, and a modified turbine model with added feedback coupling. Across these cases, REMAL consistently demonstrates the cost effectiveness when repeated evaluations of the fixed point across the design space are necessary. Theoretically, we show that, under mild assumptions, REMAL's predictive fixed point error is bounded.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.