Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Constrained Diffusion Models with Primal-Dual Inference
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:This paper develops constrained diffusion models with primal-dual inference (PDI) to sample from optimal distributions of entropy-regularized optimization problems with \emph{average} constraints. We formalize constrained sampling in the Lagrangian dual domain, where the optimal distribution takes the form of a Gibbs distribution indexed by the optimal dual variable. Rather than estimating this dual multiplier before sampling and freezing it throughout generation, PDI jointly infers the optimal primal distribution and its parametrizing dual variable. Each reverse diffusion step denoises using the score field associated with the current multiplier and then updates the multiplier through dual ascent using the estimated constraint violation of the denoised samples. To enable this conditional score field, we train a single dual-conditioned score network over the family of Gibbs distributions induced by the dual variables encountered during inference. We prove that the time average of the dual variables generated along the inference trajectory converges to a neighborhood of the dual optimum and bound the effect of residual dual mismatch on the terminal distribution through schedule-dependent stability factors. We evaluate PDI on constrained sampling from a mixture of Gaussians, wireless resource allocation, and portfolio management.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.