Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:DiT-JSCC: Rethinking Deep JSCC with Diffusion Transformers and Semantic Representations
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Generative joint source-channel coding (GJSCC) has emerged as a new Deep JSCC paradigm for achieving high-fidelity and robust image transmission under extreme wireless channel conditions, such as ultra-low bandwidth and low signal-to-noise ratio. Recent studies commonly adopt diffusion models as generative decoders, but they frequently produce visually realistic results with limited semantic consistency. This limitation stems from a fundamental mismatch between reconstruction-oriented JSCC encoders and generative decoders, as the former lack explicit semantic discriminability and fail to provide reliable conditional cues. In this paper, we propose DiT-JSCC, a novel GJSCC backbone that can jointly learn a semantics-prioritized representation encoder and a diffusion transformer (DiT) based generative decoder, our open-source project aims to promote the future research in GJSCC. Specifically, we design a semantics-detail dual-branch encoder that aligns naturally with a coarse-to-fine conditional DiT decoder, prioritizing semantic consistency under extreme channel conditions. Moreover, a training-free adaptive bandwidth allocation strategy inspired by Kolmogorov complexity is introduced to further improve the transmission efficiency, thereby indeed redefining the notion of information value in the era of generative decoding. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiT-JSCC consistently outperforms existing JSCC methods in both semantic consistency and visual quality, particularly in extreme regimes.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.