Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Emergence of unique hues from sparse coding of color in natural scenes
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Our subjective experience of color is typically described by abstract properties such as hue, saturation, and brightness that do not directly correspond to sensory signals arising from cones in the retina. Along the hue dimension, certain colors -- red, green, blue, and yellow -- appear unique in that they are not perceived as a combination of other colors, and the pairs red-green and blue-yellow appear opposites. However, the anatomical and physiological correlates of these 'unique hues' within the brain and the reason for their existence remain a mystery. Here, we demonstrate a direct connection between these hues and the statistics of the natural visual environment. Analysis of simulated cone responses on a dataset of 503 calibrated natural images reveals a strongly non-Gaussian distribution in 3D color space, with heavy tails in distinct, asymmetrically arranged directions. A sparse coding model is then adapted to this data so as to minimize the total sum of coefficients on the basis vectors for representing the data. A six basis-vector model converges to the four unique hues in addition to black and white. Moreover, we find that the nonlinear nature of inference in the sparse coding model yields both excitatory and inhibitory interactions among latent variables; the former facilitates combining adjacent pairs of unique hues to encode intermediate hues situated between them, while the latter enforces mutual exclusivity between opposite unique hues. Together, these findings shed new light on the distribution of color in the natural environment and provide a linking principle between this structure and the phenomenology of color appearance.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.