Statistics > Machine Learning
Title:Ricci-Filtration: Boosting Retrieval-Augmented Generation Reranker to Query-Answer Tasks by Discrete Ricci Flow
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Ricci flow is a curvature-guided diffusion process that deforms space by shrinking regions of high positive curvature and expanding those with negative curvature. Similarly, discrete Ricci flow on weighted graphs modifies edge weights by shrinking edges with positive Ricci curvature and stretching those with negative Ricci curvature, effectively increasing the separation between clusters. Inspired by these two cornerstone works, we propose a geometry-based RAG reranker enhancement procedure called Ricci-Filtration. By modeling the input query and initial retrieved chunks as a network, where the input query and chunks serve as nodes and embedding-based pairwise relations define an initial graph, Ricci-Filtration leverages discrete curvature and Ricci flow to evaluate the structural importance of each chunk with respect to the user query. The system first filters the initial chunks based on their geometric curvature relative to the query; then, a reranker processes the remaining chunks to enhance generative performance. We theoretically prove that normalized discrete Ricci flow can detect community structures by identifying distinct asymptotic behaviors in edge weights. This supports the removal of ``noisy'' document chunks characterized by large weights and negative Ricci curvature relative to the query node. Extensive experiments confirm that Ricci-Filtration outperforms several baseline reranking methods in accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores. Furthermore, ablation studies demonstrate that the Ricci-Filtration generally outperforms the baseline under various settings, highlighting the framework's robustness across different architectures.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.