Now that Apple's WWDC 2026 event is over, there are a lot of questions left about what's different in iOS 27 when it comes to app features.
This year's WWDC was a little different from its previous software events and felt closer to Google I/O than ever, as Apple's AI efforts were priority No. 1 for the show. Still, its approach to delivering its AI features felt a bit more palatable than what we saw from Google's onslaught of nearly unavoidable AI it announced at its developer conference last month.
Artificial intelligence stole the spotlight at WWDC, but that's far from the only thing you can expect when the latest version of the OS drops later this year. On Tuesday, Apple shared some new details on what's coming in iOS 27, including updates to Apple Wallet.
Apple Wallet is a widely used app that lets you pay for everyday items and send cash to people with iPhones, and you can even add your ID or driver's license to the app in supported states. And in the coming months, it'll become even more powerful. Here's what's coming to Apple Wallet in iOS 27.
Split the tab in a snap
Splitting a bill can be cumbersome, but that's about to change for Apple Wallet.
Soon, you'll be able to point your camera at a receipt in Siri Mode and Apple Intelligence will recognize and turn the items into something actionable, allowing you to select your items from a list on the tab to quickly calculate how much you owe, so you know exactly how much to send to pay your part via Apple Cash.
The new feature is available in Apple Wallet, Messages and via Apple Intelligence in your iPhone's camera app.
Create digital passes from physical cards
As popular as Apple Wallet is, not all membership, loyalty rewards cards or tickets support the app, but that hurdle will become a thing of the past in iOS 27.
With Siri Mode in the camera app, you'll be able to place a physical card with a barcode in the viewfinder, and Siri will turn it into a digital pass for easy access, so you don't have to present the physical card every time you want to use it. These passes can also be made directly in Apple Wallet.
The new digital passes can also be pinned to the Smart Stack on Apple Watches for quick access from your wrist.
New Disney Park pass experience
In iOS 27, Apple Wallet will become even more useful the next time you walk into Walt Disney World. Your pass will display your reservations, tickets and upcoming events in real time.
When you arrive at the park, you'll receive a Wallet notification on your iPhone and Apple Watch with trip details right when you need them.
Updated digital key experience
With Apple Wallet, you can already use your iPhone to unlock room doors at participating hotels and resorts, but a richer experience is on the way. Apple says the updated feature will show more details about your trip, provide updates for booked activities and let you access services right from Apple Wallet.
New Apple Pay checkout design
Apple will introduce a redesigned checkout process for Apple Pay. You'll be able to swipe to see the cards available for payment, so that it's easy to choose how you want to pay for your items.
Eligible cards in your Wallet will also provide additional information, such as reward card balances, pay later options, debit account balances and more.
Later this year, Apple will introduce a way to add funds to eligible debit cards in Apple Wallet and when checking out online.
Tap to Share
This fall, Apple will introduce Tap to Share when checking out with Tap to Pay in-store to enhance the shopping experience. The new feature will let you easily connect to a merchant's iPhone to securely share personal information with just a few taps. This should not only improve the overall experience but also make it faster.
Once connected, you'll be able to see your basket items in real time to keep track of purchases and pay directly with Apple Pay, without having to tap again.