Any time of year is a good time for a Hallmark romance. Since the company split ways with Peacock in 2025, you may have been seeking a new way to access your favorite Hallmark TV shows and Christmas romances. Well, look no further; I have the answer, and it won't cost you a dime.
If you've never heard of Hoopla, now's the time to pay attention. This is the streaming platform you can use to tap into all the Hallmark goodness you've been missing out on. You can find it at your local library and, along with all the low-stakes mysteries and festive meet-cutes you've been pining for, you can find an assortment of other types of entertainment here, too, like audiobooks, podcasts, all types of movies and TV shows, music and educational material.
But you're here for Hallmark, so let's talk about that. Hallmark Channel's entire collection is available through Hoopla's Hallmark Plus BingePass. With this feature, you can borrow premium content for seven days. Get ready to binge all the charming love stories you want. This is the perfect way to catch up if you're behind on hit shows like Ride and When Calls the Heart. It's all ad-free and costs absolutely nothing.
Read more: I Love Hallmark Movies, but This New Netflix Flick Shakes Up the Rom-Com Formula
First, you will need a valid library card and email address to sign up for the Hallmark Plus BingePass on Hoopla. Visit the Hoopla website (or download the mobile app) and follow the steps to create an account. Keep your library card on hand, as you may be asked to provide your card number and PIN. You can sign up for one if you don't have a library card.
Once you complete the setup process for your Hoopla account, you can start streaming. From there, simply pick the Hallmark Plus BingePass option from the BingePass prompt to watch. Not all libraries offer Hoopla, so I recommend checking with your local branch to see if it's available. If you would rather not rely on the library to scratch that feel-good movie itch, you can try Pluto TV and watch its curated channel, devoted to all things Hallmark.
Want access to all of Hallmark's content library and don't mind paying? You can always sign up for Hallmark Plus — the channel's exclusive streaming platform — for $8 a month or $80 a year. A paid subscription gets you access to Hallmark's content library, along with all-new exclusive original series and movies. Extra perks, as listed on the Hallmark Plus website, include a Hallmark Gold Crown Store coupon, Crown Rewards points, unlimited eCards and exclusive surprises.