There's a pretty easy rule to buying a Kindle: Wait for a sale. Amazon's Prime Day Kindle deals, which happen every summer and fall, plus other sale events like Black Friday, always offer the best prices. While Amazon's summer Prime Days were in July in previous years, this year they arrived early, in June, and will run for almost a full week from June 23 until June 26.
Any day during that sale is a great one to claim your own new Kindle e-reader from Amazon. The on-sale Kindles usually don't sell out, but if there's a specific color or storage size you want, you might want to snap that up early in case that specific version does sell out for a little bit. So far, there are no Kindle Scribes planned to go on sale, but it would be nice to see options like the expensive Kindle Scribe Colorsoft available for cheaper. Here are the best Kindles that are on sale right now.
Also be sure to browse our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
Best Prime Day Kindle Deals
If you want the best e-reader Amazon makes, it's the Kindle Paperwhite. It has a 7-inch screen that's illuminated by an adjustable warm front light, and a battery life that lasts up to 12 weeks. The screen is only black-and-white, but it's got great contrast and snappy performance, and the sale price makes it a great deal. Both a Signature and a regular version are on sale, and the Signature adds an auto-adjusting front light and wireless charging.
If you want to use Amazon Prime Day pricing to get a colorful Kindle for cheaper, then look no further than the Kindle Colorsoft's sale. This colorful e-reader has a fun, albeit muted, color screen that you won't find on other Kindle devices besides the Kids version of this device (more on that below) and the Kindle Scribe Colorsoft. I do wish it had more features for the price point, like page-turner buttons, but Amazon recently added a true Dark Mode to the device at least. But that's what makes buying a Colorsoft on sale the right move versus paying full price.
Both the regular and Signature versions are on sale for the Colorsoft, and the Signature version has the same benefits as the Paperwhite, with wireless charging and an auto-adjusting front light added. Both versions of the Colorsoft are ad-free, too.
Want a Kindle for under $100? This sale is the one to jump on. The 11th-generation Kindle is a little smaller than the Paperwhite and Colorsoft, with a 6-inch screen, and it doesn't have the warm front light. It's otherwise plenty powerful and snappy, especially for the price, and is the only Kindle to come in this fun matcha green color.
If you're shopping for a Kindle for a kid, Kindle has a specific Kids version of both its Paperwhite and Colorsoft Kindles that are currently on sale. Both come with a fun cover and Amazon Kids+ content, but the Paperwhite Kids has six months of that content, while the Colorsoft Kids has a full year. The color screen is a great option for kids reading graphic novels and illustrated stories.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.