Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Fail-RAG : A Retrieval Augmented Generation Informed Framework for Robot Failure Identification
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Industry automation is witnessing an evolution in robotics driven by both technological breakthroughs and societal changes: progress towards generalist robots, embodied and physical artificial intelligence (AI), and increasing labor shortage in this http URL intelligent autonomous robot needs to not only act according to planned motions but also react to any unexpected events. In this study, we focus on such unexpected events in warehouses where robots are used for material handling. Specifically, we refer to any unexpected events as failures and develop methods to detect robot operations related failures. Rule-based detection methods may break since the form of failures could change due to the dynamic nature of both environments and tasks. We propose 'Fail-RAG', a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)-based failure detection framework where failure images and context information are embedded and queried against a failure database by calculating their similarities. Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are further used to analyze failures and provide details by following our instruction template. We evaluated the performance of Fail-RAG by conducting both simulation and physical experiments using fixed robot arms and a mobile manipulator for multiple tasks that are common in warehouse automation. Fail-RAG achieved 25 percentage point higher failure detection accuracy on average across five types of robot operations compared to using off-the-shelf VLMs, indicating its effectiveness for real-world failure detection.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.