Computer Science > Robotics
Title:GAIT: Legged Robot Proprioceptive State Estimation with Attention over Inertial-Leg Tokens
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In this paper, we propose a method that applies Inertial-Leg (IL) tokenization to an attention-based network for proprioceptive state estimation in legged robots. Unlike existing learning-based state estimators that concatenate all sensor measurements into a single flat vector, the proposed architecture represents inertial measurements and leg-wise measurements as individual tokens and uses an attention mechanism to learn the relative importance of each this http URL design allows the network to reweight each measurement according to the current contact condition, reflecting the fact that the reliability of forward kinematic measurements depends on whether the corresponding foot is in contact. Unlike conventional contact-aided estimators, however, the proposed method learns this behavior without relying on an explicit contact estimator or on explicit measurement updates based on a stationary contact assumption. To validate the proposed method, we conducted experiments on a Unitree Go1 robot, including debris terrain not modeled in simulation and gait patterns not seen during training. Experimental results show that the proposed method achieves better estimation performance than existing learning-based state estimators under unseen gait patterns and also improves performance over contact-aided model-based methods.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.