Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Maximum entropy models of neuronal populations at and off criticality
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Empirical evidence of scaling behaviors in neuronal avalanches suggests that neuronal populations in the brain operate near criticality. Departure from scaling in neuronal avalanches has been used as a measure of distance to criticality and linked to brain disorders. A distinct line of evidence for brain criticality has come from thermodynamic signatures in maximum entropy (ME) models. Both of these approaches have been widely applied to the analysis of neuronal data. However, the relationship between deviations from avalanche criticality and thermodynamics of ME models of neuronal populations remains poorly understood. To address this question, we study spontaneous activity of organotypic rat cortex slice cultures in physiological and drug-induced hypo- or hyper-excitable conditions, which are classified as critical, subcritical and supercritical based on avalanche dynamics. We find that static ME models inferred from critical cultures show signatures of criticality in thermodynamic quantities, e.g. specific heat. However, such signatures are also present and equally strong in models inferred from supercritical cultures -- despite their altered dynamics and poor functional performance. On the contrary, ME models inferred from subcritical cultures do not show thermodynamic hints of criticality. Importantly, we confirm these results using an interpretable neural network model that can be tuned to and away from avalanche criticality. Our findings indicate that static maximum entropy models, although not constraining dynamical features, correctly distinguish subcritical from critical/supercritical systems. However, they may not be able to discriminate between avalanche criticality and supercriticality, suggesting that dynamics is relevant to capture the supercritical behavior and distinguish it from criticality.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.