Almost 20 years ago, Google pitched Android as the more open alternative to Apple’s walled garden. Last year, Google announced it would begin erecting its own walls through developer verification. The company has issued an update on its plans, affirming that the verification system will begin rolling out in select countries later this year. We’re also learning which app stores are participating in verification and the timeline for key features like the recently revealed “advanced flow” for bypassing verification.
Google has claimed that developer verification is a necessary change to smartphone software distribution, pointing to the increased prevalence of scams that trick Android users into installing malware apps. Google’s solution requires verifying the identities of developers outside the Play Store just like it does for devs publishing on its platform. This has proven to be a contentious change for myriad reasons.
In the new blog post, Google’s Matthew Forsythe confirms that the developer verification system is slated to come online on September 30 of this year. The initial deployment will be limited to countries with a high level of app scams: Brazil, Indonesia, Singapore, and Thailand.
Google released its new developer console back in March, giving external developers the opportunity to pay $25 and verify their identities early. Developers who don’t register will find that their apps cannot be sideloaded on Google-certified Android devices once verification has rolled out. Google says that almost every app in the Play Store is now ready for the change, and a “large majority” of apps outside Google Play have completed verification.
This system places more burden on developers who want to make software for Android, even if they don’t want to deal with Google directly. There are a few updates that aim to streamline the experience. Google is following through on its promise to extend verification to trusted third-party stores—if a developer is verified in one of these storefronts, they are verified on Google’s side. Google says it will verify the apps in the following stores when it begins enforcing the new restrictions.