Anthropic pulled access to its newly released AI models Mythos 5 and Fable 5 over the weekend after the US government imposed sweeping restrictions on who could use them.
The AI lab said in a statement that the federal government told it Friday afternoon that it had become aware of a way of "jailbreaking" Fable 5, bypassing limits that Anthropic had implemented to reduce the risk the model could be misused. When Anthropic first announced Mythos, it released the software to only a select group of government agencies and technology professionals because of its ability to uncover cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
The government imposed what are known as export controls on the products, which Anthropic said means it had to suspend access to the two models by any foreign national, whether inside or outside of the US. The only way it could do so is by shutting the models down entirely, the company said.
Anthropic said late Friday that it disagreed that the jailbreak it was shown warranted such sweeping action, and that such a standard could "essentially halt" new frontier AI models if applied broadly.
"As we have stated publicly, we believe the government should have the ability to block unsafe deployments, as part of a statutory process that is transparent, fair, clear and grounded in technical facts," Anthropic said. "This action does not adhere to those principles."
A representative for Anthropic declined to comment beyond the company's statement. Representatives for the US Department of Commerce didn't immediately respond to requests for comment.
Anthropic has reportedly sent staff to Washington to negotiate with the Trump administration to sort out the issue. The Wall Street Journal reported that Anthropic leaders spent several hours on calls Saturday with Secretary of Commerce Howard Lutnick and National Cyber Director Sean Cairncross.
AI safety and jailbreaks
This isn't the AI developer's first conflict with Washington over AI models. The Department of Defense declared Anthropic a "supply chain risk" earlier this year after the company insisted on restrictions against the use of its Claude AI models for fully autonomous weapons or mass domestic surveillance. The Pentagon wanted the ability to use the models for "all lawful purposes."
David Sacks, co-chair of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology and the Trump administration's former "AI and crypto czar," dismissed any connection with the conflict between Anthropic and the Pentagon. In a lengthy post on X, Sacks said the administration "feels that this issue, while serious, should be easily resolved" and that the "ball is in Anthropic's court."
The administration doesn't buy Anthropic's claim that the jailbreak isn't serious, Sacks said, and he noted that the company has built a reputation on its commitment to AI safety. "In this case, Anthropic prioritized the continued offering of the consumer model over safety," Sacks said.
It isn't really an easy fix, according to Ayham Boucher, executive director of AI strategy and innovation at Cornell University. The existence of a jailbreak isn't all that surprising because "all models can be jailbroken," Boucher said.
In this case, a jailbreak is a way for users to bypass a model's security measures by getting it to do something it shouldn't. One typical approach is to have the AI chatbot "role-play" something it wouldn't otherwise do. It may not tell you how to rob a bank, Boucher said as an example, but it may explain the process if you say you're writing a screenplay about a bank robbery.
As AI models have grown more complex, developers have improved their defenses against jailbreaks and tricks, but it remains a constant battle. Anthropic acknowledged this in its release of Fable 5. One extra precaution was that Anthropic insisted Fable 5 users let the company store their interactions with the bot for 30 days. That's not usually the case -- and it may have cost the company, because some businesses won't use services that store data, Boucher said.
But that 30-day data retention policy was a way for Anthropic to identify and fix potential jailbreaks. "They decided they can monitor, and then they can learn and make it a little harder," Boucher said. "It's not going to be perfect."
The government's request for Anthropic to just patch the hole shows a misunderstanding of the nature of the technology, Boucher said, "because there will be another hole."
'No roadblocks to reach Mythos-level models'
While Anthropic is at the center of this story, it won't be the only company with a model this capable at coding and cybersecurity. Some researchers have noted Mythos isn't necessarily all that more skillful at finding flaws compared with, say, OpenAI's GPT-5.5.
The reality is that models are getting so good at cybersecurity because coding and math are the easiest things to scale up, Boucher said. Models' improvement in things like writing have slowed down, because they are harder to verify and test objectively, but math and coding are still improving "exponentially," he said.
That's the case for all of the AI labs, not just Anthropic. It just so happens that Anthropic was first, but competitors won't be far behind. That could include not just American companies like OpenAI and Google, but Chinese developers like DeepSeek and Alibaba. "There are no roadblocks for any other model developers to reach Mythos-level models in coding," Boucher said.
The competition is intense, and the Trump administration has touted American companies' need to stay ahead of China as a priority and a reason for limited regulation. But Friday's abrupt halt to Fable and Mythos could severely damage US labs' competitiveness. The export controls not only bar Anthropic from allowing foreign nationals to use the models as customers -- it limits the access of foreign nationals who work at Anthropic, who may be key to the development of the next model.
"I can't see how this is not slowing down model development," Boucher said.
Sentiment in Washington appears to be turning toward more regulation of advanced AI models, although it seems to be happening in confused fits and starts rather than in a coordinated way. The Trump administration last year revealed an AI action plan that said limiting regulations on developers and fossil fuel companies was essential to ensure "global AI dominance." But Mythos apparently jolted the White House. Earlier this month, President Donald Trump signed an executive order -- strictly voluntary -- that asked developers to let the federal government review frontier models that could pose security risks ahead of their release.
"The voluntariness of that process seems to have lasted only a short time," said Samir Jain, vice president of policy at the Center for Democracy and Technology.
Cybersecurity risks are real, and the government does have an interest in securing its own systems and those critical to the safety of the country, Jain said. But Friday's action appears arbitrary and opaque, without any clear reasoning or process, in his view. It's unclear exactly what authority the government used to force the models from the market, and these conversations are happening behind closed doors.
There are First Amendment issues at play here, too, Jain said. AI models are generating speech, and developers have made editorial choices, meaning the government has to consider freedom of speech and expression when regulating them, he said. And not just the rights of Anthropic, but users as well.
"That doesn't mean that the government can't regulate these models," Jain said. "Particularly when they have a compelling and important interest to do so. But it does put even more premium on making sure whatever regulation is done is done in accord with the rule of law."