Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:Structure leads and dominates comprehension in naturalistic reading
View PDFAbstract:The hierarchical account and statistical or sequential account have long been framed as rival theories in explaining online comprehension. A lot of evidence has shown that both hierarchical and non-hierarchical factors can shape comprehension and the open question is no longer whether hierarchy contributes, but when and how strongly it does. We addressed the question with co-registered EEG and eye-tracking, treating syntactic depth as the variable for operationalizing hierarchical structure. On timing, hierarchical structure influenced reading before the eyes fixated a word: its neural effect emerged as early as 108 ms before fixation onset, over right-central regions, and the scanpath showed an anticipatory bias toward structurally central words. Both the transitional-probability analysis and the regression on fixation-related potentials supported this pre-fixational timing. In the transitional-probability analysis, readers preferentially moved between syntactically central words rather than following serial word order, showing that scanpaths are organized by syntactic depth rather than by linear adjacency. On strength, Bayesian network modeling showed that syntactic depth was the strongest predictor of departures from linear, word-by-word reading, outweighing lexical familiarity and surprisal. Taken together, the results indicate that hierarchical structure anticipatorily guides online comprehension at both the behavioral and neural levels, and dominates the reading path relative to statistical features.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.