Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Minimal Set of Questions for Theories of Consciousness: Toward a Unified Explanatory Framework
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:A central challenge in consciousness research is the lack of agreement on what a theory of consciousness should explain, which makes it difficult to compare existing theories. We propose a framework for organizing explanatory targets of theories based on a minimal set of seven questions designed to be theoretically neutral, causally and functionally relevant, and applicable across different systems. We focus particularly on the role of causation based on the argument that causal relations cannot be fully specified within standard physical descriptions alone. Introducing an asymmetric causal structure allows internal mechanisms to be represented explicitly and helps distinguish between variable- and structure-level causation. As an example, we apply the proposed framework to analyzing the Dual-Laws Model. The aim of the framework is not to propose a definitive theory but to provide a common basis for analyzing and developing theories of consciousness.
Submission history
From: Yoshiyuki Ohmura [view email][v1] Fri, 13 Mar 2026 05:09:09 UTC (890 KB)
[v2] Mon, 16 Mar 2026 06:33:34 UTC (890 KB)
[v3] Tue, 17 Mar 2026 03:27:24 UTC (890 KB)
[v4] Fri, 19 Jun 2026 05:51:54 UTC (37 KB)
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.