Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:Zero-Shot Learning in Industrial Scenarios: New Large-Scale Benchmark, Challenges and Baseline
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Large Visual Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved remarkable success in vision tasks. However, the significant differences between industrial and natural scenes make applying LVLMs challenging. Existing LVLMs rely on user-provided prompts to segment objects. This often leads to suboptimal performance due to the inclusion of irrelevant pixels. In addition, the scarcity of data also makes the application of LVLMs in industrial scenarios remain unexplored. To fill this gap, this paper proposes an open industrial dataset and a Refined Text-Visual Prompt (RTVP) for zero-shot industrial defect detection. First, this paper constructs the Multi-Modal Industrial Open Dataset (MMIO) containing 80K+ samples. MMIO contains diverse industrial categories, including 6 super categories and 18 subcategories. MMIO is the first large-scale multi-scenes pre-training dataset for industrial zero-shot learning, and provides valuable training data for open models in future industrial scenarios. Based on MMIO, this paper provides a RTVP specifically for industrial zero-shot tasks. RTVP has two significant advantages: First, this paper designs an expert-guided large model domain adaptation mechanism and designs an industrial zero-shot method based on Mobile-SAM, which enhances the generalization ability of large models in industrial scenarios. Second, RTVP automatically generates visual prompts directly from images and considers text-visual prompt interactions ignored by previous LVLM, improving visual and textual content understanding. RTVP achieves SOTA with 42.2% and 24.7% AP in zero-shot and closed scenes of MMIO.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.