Want to keep track of the largest startup funding deals in 2026 with our curated list of $100 million-plus venture deals to U.S.-based companies? Check out The Crunchbase Megadeals Board.
This is a weekly feature that runs down the week’s top 10 announced funding rounds in the U.S. Check out last week’s biggest funding deal roundup here.
Startup investors were in a spendy mood this week, backing more than a dozen rounds in the multiple hundreds of millions. Of those, the biggest one went to spend-management platform Ramp, which closed on $750 million, followed by three $500 million rounds for companies in the AI and space tech sectors.
1. Ramp, $750M, finance software: Spend-management software provider Ramp secured $750 million in a financing led by Iconiq, GIC and Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan. The round set a $44 billion valuation for the 7-year-old, New York-based company.
2. (tied) Impulse Space, $500M, space tech: Redondo Beach, California-based Impulse Space, a developer of spacecraft and propulsion systems for transport, moving and orbital repositioning in space, raised $500 million in Series D funding. 137 Ventures and Banner VC led the financing which brings total investment to date to more than $1 billion.
2. (tied) Supabase, $500M, AI developer tools: Supabase, provider of an open source platform for developers and AI app builders, closed on $500 million in fresh funding. GIC led the financing, which set a $10.5 billion valuation for the 6-year-old, San Francisco-based company.
2. (tied) Flourish, $500M, foundational AI: New York-based Flourish, a startup working on artificial intelligence models inspired by the human brain, raised $500 million in initial funding. Backers include Jeff Bezos, Lux Capital and Google Ventures.
5. Helion, $465M, fusion energy: Helion, a startup with a mission to build the world’s first fusion power plant, picked up $465 million in Series G funding led by Thrive Capital at a $15.5 billion post-money valuation. The round brings total reported funding for the Everett, Washington-based company to at least $1.5 billion, per Crunchbase data.
6. NewLimit, $435M, longevity medicines: NewLimit, a developer of medicines designed to restore youthful function in old cells through epigenetic reprogramming, closed on $435 million in Series C funding. Founders Fund led the financing for the South San Francisco, California-based company, which was co-founded by Coinbase CEO Brian Armstrong.
7. (tied) Suno, $400M, AI for music: Suno, a provider of AI tools for making music, raised $400 million in Series D funding led by Bond. The round set a $5.4 billion valuation for the company, which is currently facing lawsuits from multiple music labels for training its AI on copyrighted materials.
7. (tied) Generalist AI, $400M, robotics: Generalist AI, a startup focused on using AI to enable robots to do complex tasks, picked up $400 million in new funding led by Radical Ventures. The financing reportedly set a $2 billion valuation for the 2-year-old, San Mateo, California-based company.
9. AlphaSense, $350M, AI enterprise software: AlphaSense, an AI-enabled market intelligence and workflow orchestration platform, closed on $350 million in a new funding round led by Vitruvian Partners, Accenture Ventures, J.P. Morgan Asset Management, D.E. Shaw Ventures and Pinegrove Opportunity Partners. The round set a $7.5 billion valuation for the New York-based company.
10. Mach Industries, $300M, defense tech: Defense tech startup Mach Industries raised $300 million in Series C funding at a $1.8 billion valuation. Ribbit Capital and Infinite Capital led the financing for the 3-year-old, Huntington Beach, California-based company.
Methodology
We tracked the largest announced rounds in the Crunchbase database that were raised by U.S.-based companies for the period of May 30-June 5. Although most announced rounds are represented in the database, there could be a small time lag as some rounds are reported late in the week.
Illustration: Dom Guzman
Stay up to date with recent funding rounds, acquisitions, and more with the Crunchbase Daily.