Computer Science > Sound
Title:LLM-Based Synthetic Ground Truth Generation for Audio-Based Emotion Classification via In-Context Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Understanding human states and interaction dynamics is a core goal of human-computer interaction (HCI). As interaction paradigms become more immersive, virtual reality (VR) has emerged as a powerful platform for studying collaborative work. In such settings, evaluating team collaboration states, including team performance and team resilience, requires continuous and reliable inference of latent team-level cognitive and affective states from multi-modal sensor data, such as speech signals. However, generating ground truth labels for these latent states remains challenging due to sensor-induced noise, contextual variability, and sparse expert annotations. Traditional self-reporting approaches provide only static and delayed measurements and are therefore insufficient for capturing dynamic team processes reflected in continuous speech data. In this work, we propose a large language model (LLM)-driven, agentic inference workflow for automated emotion-related synthetic ground truth generation from streaming speech data in multi-user VR environments. Leveraging the generalization capabilities of LLMs, we use In-Context Learning (ICL) with few-shot demonstrations of paired audio-based samples and their corresponding transcriptions. ICL tends to achieve task adaptation comparable to model fine-tuning while circumventing the computational overhead of parameter updates. To construct informative and robust in-context prompts, we adopt a retrieval-based selection strategy that dynamically identifies relevant audio demonstrations based on similarity in the acoustic feature space.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.