Computer Science > Robotics
Title:LieIPM: Lie Group Interior Point Method for Direct Trajectory Optimization of Rigid Bodies
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Designing dynamically feasible trajectories for rigid bodies is a fundamental problem in robotics. While direct methods are widely used, the existing constrained optimizers typically operate in Euclidean space and ignore the manifold structure of rigid body motions. This mismatch may introduce singularities or lead to poorly conditioned optimization problems. To bridge this gap, we develop a structure-aware framework for constrained trajectory optimization directly on matrix Lie groups. Our approach is based on the second-order rigid body models utilizing Lie group structures, which enables efficient Newton-type updates while preserving the underlying geometry. Building on this model, we propose a line-search Lie Group Interior Point Method (LieIPM) to handle constraints on the manifolds. We instantiate the framework for rigid body motion planning using Lie group variational integrators and derive closed-form intrinsic derivatives that exploit group symmetries. The LieIPM preserves the topology of rotation motions by construction and avoids singularities. Numerical results demonstrate superior robustness and faster convergence compared to general-purpose solvers and structure-exploiting optimal control methods.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.