Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Learning from Human Driving: A Human-in-the-Loop Online Behavior Cloning Framework for Autonomous Driving
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:With the evolution of large foundation models (LFMs), data-driven autonomous driving has made significant strides. However, existing paradigms still face severe challenges in complex interaction and long-tail scenarios due to distribution shift and causal confusion. These limitations often result in a lack of human-level decision-making flexibility and safety in extreme conditions. To overcome this limitation, this paper proposes a Human-in-the-Loop Online Behavior Cloning frame work (HiL-OBC) for autonomous driving, which aims to deeply integrate the cross-modal perceptual capabilities of LFMs with the high-level driving intelligence of human experts. Specifically, HiL-OBC deployment is executed through three critical phases: policy initialization with human intervention, latent behavioral modeling with Bayesian policy adaptation, and online deploy ment and updates. Furthermore, we design a Multi-modal Online Behavior Cloning (MOBC) model, which optimizes the base driving policy online through a lightweight network architecture, a takeover trigger mechanism, and a multi-variant loss function, thereby enhancing the system's decision-making robustness in complex environments. We evaluated the HiL-OBC on the LangAuto-Human CARLA benchmark. Experimental results demonstrate that the driving policies optimized via the human-in-the-loop mechanism achieve substantial performance gains: the DS of StructNav, LFG, and LMDrive increased by 47.25%, 31.59%, and 32.12%, respectively, with a simultaneous of various experimental settings and key components highlights the advantages of human-in-the-loop learning in improving decision-making robustness and overall driving performance.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.