Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:EditSR: Enhancing Neural Symbolic Regression via Edit-based Rectification
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Neural symbolic regression models improve inference efficiency by shifting structural search to pretraining, but their one-pass autoregressive decoding is prone to error accumulation, which may lead to generating structurally incorrect expressions, especially in complex expression generation scenarios. Existing rectification strategies can alleviate this issue, but they often depend on restarting global search, thereby weakening the efficiency advantage of neural models, and remain susceptible to error accumulation. In this paper, we propose EditSR, a two-layer framework that combines a neural symbolic regression model in the first layer with an edit-based Rectifier in the second layer to achieve efficient prediction and post-hoc rectification. Instead of restarting the global search, we maintain rectification efficiency by pretraining the Rectifier. Specifically, we formulate the rectification process as a step-by-step state-transition chain starting from an incorrect expression, and develop a state-transition algorithm to construct supervised rectification chains for training the Rectifier. To ensure syntactic validity throughout rectification, each edit action is restricted to a syntactically valid space so that every edited expression remains parseable. In addition, because each edit decision is conditioned on the current state rather than the history, the Rectifier allows errors made in earlier steps to be rectified by subsequent edits, thereby reducing the risk of error accumulation. Extensive experiments and ablation studies show that EditSR substantially improves symbolic structure recovery with limited extra cost, with more pronounced gains on complex expressions, where one-pass autoregressive decoding is more susceptible to error accumulation.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.