Former Sequoia Capital managing partner Roelof Botha is joining SpaceX’s board of directors, less than a week after the company went public in the largest IPO ever.
SpaceX announced the appointment in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday. It said Botha was appointed “to fill the existing vacancy on the Board” and that he will serve until SpaceX’s next annual shareholder meeting. He will also join the SpaceX board’s audit committee. Botha didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.
Botha “brings extensive public company experience along with a deep audit committee background, having served on the boards and audit committees of numerous public companies,” SpaceX wrote in the filing. He stepped down from his role as Sequoia’s leader late last year as the firm was dealing with blowback against partner Shaun Maguire, who had made comments attacking then-New York City mayoral candidate Zohran Mamdani.
The SpaceX filing also discloses that a “family member” of Botha’s has worked at the company “since January 2025 as a member of the enterprise operations team.” SpaceX says this family member’s “compensation exceeded the $120,000 reporting threshold” but noted the compensation is “generally commensurate with their peers’.”
Botha is on many public company boards, but none quite like SpaceX, where CEO Elon Musk enjoys near-absolute control and shareholders have little power. Musk has more than 80% of the now-public company’s voting power, and owners of SpaceX stock will have severely limited opportunities to challenge him should they disagree with his actions. Musk also has control over all changes to the board’s makeup, filings show.
Botha has experience with Musk, though. Musk brought Botha — who is also from South Africa — in to run the finance division of PayPal in 2000. Botha started at the payments company in March of that year, according to his LinkedIn profile. Musk was pushed out as CEO of PayPal in September 2000.
“I’ve known Elon for over 25 years,” Botha told Fortune last year in an interview during Musk’s time running DOGE. “He was the first person to offer me a job in America. He believed in me when I was an unknown student at Stanford. I have a lot of appreciation and understanding that he’s not perfect. None of us are. He deeply cares about doing the right thing.”
The addition of Botha brings SpaceX’s board to nine directors. He joins Musk confidants Ira Ehrenpreis, Antonio Gracias, Steve Jurvetson, and Luke Nosek; SpaceX chief operating officer Gwynne Shotwell; Google executive Donald Harrison; and VC Randy Glein. Musk is chairman of the board.
Botha has been with Sequoia for more than 20 years, and the firm invested in SpaceX in 2019. It reportedly owned 1.5% of SpaceX heading into the IPO, giving it a position worth more than $20 billion.