Google is joining the slew of tech companies amping up their software to prove that children can safely use their products. On Tuesday, the tech giant announced it's expanding parental controls to all devices running Android 17, the company's latest software update.
Google Pixel owners can access parental controls through the Settings app. To set limits, open Settings > Parental controls on the device you want to manage. From there, you can customize your child's smartphone experience by setting screen time limits for individual apps, as well as an overall limit for phone use.
In Android 17, there's a new widget to ban specific apps. You can also control which apps your kid can download from the Google Play Store. For example, you can set the filters to only show apps that are rated as suitable for everyone or teens, filtering out apps rated only for adult use. But it's worth noting that three of the biggest platforms that have been at the center of the child safety debate -- Roblox, Instagram and YouTube -- are all rated as OK for teens in the Google Play Store.
The new software tools come at a time of immense scrutiny of the impact of tech on children. Across the globe, nations are moving to ban social media from teenagers, with the UK's recent announcement following similar laws in Australia and Spain. In the US, several high-profile court cases have brought big tech into the spotlight. Instagram and YouTube were recently found liable in court for having intentionally addictive designs, harming the mental health of their younger users.
Experts and advocacy groups have been debating for years about the best way to keep kids safe online. Tech companies have argued that sweeping bans don't keep kids safe from dangers online, arguing that age verification and device-level controls, like the ones included in Android 17, are a better pathway. Apple also recently announced it's adding new parental controls to its upcoming iOS 27.
For more, check out the digital wellness tools available on Android and iOS and the best Android phones of 2026.