Computer Science > Robotics
Title:AIR-VLA+: Decoupling Movement and Manipulation via Cascaded Dual-Action Decoders with Asymmetric MoE for Aerial Robots
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Aerial manipulation systems have long suffered from representation coupling in end-to-end control, as platform-level Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) movement and end-effector-level arm manipulation differ substantially in action scale, dynamics, and control objectives. In this paper, we propose AIR-VLA+, a flow matching action generation architecture specifically designed for aerial manipulation, featuring cascaded dual-action decoders and an asymmetric feature-level Mixture of Experts (MoE). We construct cascaded manipulation and movement decoders, allowing the UAV to unidirectionally observe the manipulator's intent during movement to achieve workflow coordination, while isolating the impact of UAV movement information backpropagation on arm manipulation stability. Addressing the characteristic that UAV movement is highly dependent on high-level semantics and responsible for task state transitions in aerial manipulation, we design an input feature enhancement module for the UAV movement decoder. This module introduces an implicit visual grasp projector to perceive the interaction state between the gripper and the object, and injects compressed global semantic features. Within the UAV movement decoder, we deploy an implicit MoE architecture, enabling different movement experts to spontaneously exhibit capacity inclinations for various task stages during training. Through dense soft blending computation on the feature manifold, the UAV movement is endowed with stronger task-stage adaptability. Experiments on the standardized AIR-VLA benchmark demonstrate that our method comprehensively surpasses all baselines with an overall average score of 48.0. The overall task completion score improves by 80.2\% compared to the single-head $\pi_{0.5}$ policy, effectively mitigating the heterogeneous coordinated control conflicts of composite robots.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.