Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:It's Much Easier for Neural Networks to learn Game of Life Dynamics with the Right Activation Function: Polynomial Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Previous work has found a gap between the scale of neural networks that reliably learn Conway's Game of Life, and minimal networks capable of representing the classic cellular automaton with hard-coded parameter values. Viewing neural network learning as a search process suggests a dependence on networks large enough to contain sub-networks with lucky initializations (sometimes known as 'winning tickets') that actually learn the task. In this work, we reorient our perspective from discovering Life rules as a search problem back to a learning problem, and reason that with fitting inductive biases, the problem should be much more amenable to minimal networks. We find that network variants with several alternative activation functions meaningfully outperform the default choice of Rectified Linear Units, and in particular, that a 2nd degree polynomial activation function consistently learns Life dynamics with or without the benefit of learning neural weights. Our results provide an informative demonstration of the benefits of matching learning to the task at hand and challenge the easy default choice of scale for all problems. In particular, we advocate for the use of cellular automata as simple test domains for developing strategies that can benefit machine learning for science, physics-based deep learning, and interpretable machine learning.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.