Tiny cameras in your ears may be part of Apple's AI future. The company is preparing camera-equipped AirPods for release in late 2027, according to a report from Bloomberg's Mark Gurman on Tuesday.
The new earbuds are expected to arrive around the same time as a second-generation foldable iPhone and a 20th-anniversary iPhone model, Bloomberg reported, citing unnamed people familiar with Apple's plans. Apple didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
The cameras reportedly wouldn't be meant for taking photos or recording video of the inside of your ear. Instead, they would act more like AI sensors, giving Siri visual context about the world around you.
That could let someone ask Siri questions about what they're looking at, like what to make for dinner based on a set of ingredients, according to Bloomberg. This would most likely use Apple's Visual Intelligence feature, which is designed to analyze images and provide context based on what the camera on your device sees.
Apple announced new Siri and Visual Intelligence features last week at WWDC 2026 as part of iOS 27 and its other operating system updates. The new Apple Intelligence features are expected to arrive this fall, while Siri AI will be available as a beta later this year.
Bloomberg reported that the camera AirPods are code-named B798 and were originally planned for 2026 but were slightly delayed due to Apple's struggles with AI software. The company also reportedly needed more time to develop visual AI models capable of identifying objects in its surroundings.
The earbuds are expected to look similar to current AirPods Pro models, aside from cameras embedded in the stems. Bloomberg also reported that the device would include external lights to show when data is being sent to the cloud for processing.
The reported AI-powered AirPods are part of Apple's broader push into AI hardware. Bloomberg said Apple is also working on smart glasses that could arrive as early as late 2027, along with a camera-equipped pendant that could be worn on clothing or around the neck.
Apple is reportedly preparing a busy iPhone lineup. Bloomberg previously reported that Apple's first foldable iPhone is expected to launch in 2026. Apple is also said to be working on a 20th-anniversary iPhone with a nearly edge-to-edge display and curved glass that wraps around the sides.
The timing could still change, as it has in the past. Apple hasn't announced camera-equipped AirPods, a foldable iPhone or a 20th-anniversary iPhone.