Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Single frequency filtering based multi-speaker direction of arrival estimation from stereo recordings
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Robust direction-of-arrival (DoA) estimation from noisy and reverberant microphone signals remains challenging. Conventional estimators such as generalized cross-correlation (GCC) and its variants operate in the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) domain, where spectral features primarily reflect vocal-tract characteristics. Recent single frequency filtering (SFF)-based estimators instead use a time-frequency representation that provides high spectral resolution of harmonics along with high temporal resolution of excitation-source events, such as epoch-like impulses. Since excitation-source features have been shown to be more robust to noise and reverberation than spectral features, this work proposes an improved SFF-based DoA estimator that correlates the envelopes of SFF outputs across microphone channels using PHAT-weighted GCC. We further provide a comprehensive evaluation of SFF-based and state-of-the-art GCC-based estimators using publicly available real-room recordings under challenging reverberant, multi-speaker, and noise-corrupted conditions. Experimental results show that the proposed method and an existing SFF-based estimator achieve detection and accuracy performance that is superior or comparable to the best GCC-based estimator across all test cases. We also demonstrate that using speech-dominant bins improves GCC-PHAT robustness, motivating future incorporation of such weighting strategies into SFF-based DoA estimation.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.