Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Efficient Domain-Adaptive Policy Learning via Kernel Representation with Application to Quadrotor Control under Non-Stationary Disturbances
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We present an algorithm for efficient domain-adaptive policy learning via kernel representations. Learning domain-adaptive policies is challenging since it requires an environment representation that is both sufficiently expressive to model complex sim-to-real gaps during offline training, and computationally efficient enough to support rapid online adaptation during deployment. For instance, a quadrotor may encounter time-varying, non-stationary disturbances, such as sudden gusts of wind, payload shifts, or transitions between distinct flight regimes with and without ground effects. To address these challenges, we model unknown disturbances using a differentiable kernel approximation based on random Fourier features. During the offline training phase, we randomly sample kernel coefficients and bandwidth parameters to generate a rich diversity of disturbance profiles. We then optimize the control policy via differentiable simulation with analytical gradients, a process that takes only 50 seconds of training time on an RTX 4090 GPU. During hardware deployment, the policy adapts to non-stationary environments in real time by updating both the kernel coefficients and bandwidth through online least-squares estimation. We evaluate our method on quadrotor trajectory tracking tasks across high-fidelity numerical simulations and hardware experiments using Crazyflie, subjected to various disturbances, including complex aerodynamic effects, wind, ground effects, and payload fluctuations.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.