Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Point Cloud Segmentation for Autonomous Clip Positioning in Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy on a Phantom
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:High-risk applications in robotics, such as robot-assisted surgery, present unique challenges. These systems must be both highly precise and interpretable in order to be deployed in environments with very low tolerance for error or unsafe exploration. We present the first robotic system to demonstrate autonomous clip positioning on a physical phantom in laparoscopic surgery, one of the most common interventions in general surgery. After segmentation of a colorless point cloud from a single camera, target positions for the clips are extracted using spline interpolation, and can then be adjusted by the human operator. The segmentation model is trained on only 60 hand-labeled real point clouds, reflecting data scarcity in the surgical domain. We overcome this with a combination of pre-training on 128,000 synthetic point clouds and two novel data augmentation techniques. The motion of the end-effector to each target is visualized for the operator, satisfying the unique motion constraints of minimally-invasive surgery while ensuring that the robot's actions are verifiable and interpretable. In real robot experiments, our system localizes targets with the required precision of 0.75mm at a 95% success rate and executes autonomous clip positioning with a 100% success rate. We provide insights that are applicable to many other surgical and non-surgical tasks that require identifying and navigating to a precise target. Source code and project page: this https URL
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.