What Matters in Practical Learned Image Compression
AuthorsKedar Tatwawadi, Parisa Rahimzadeh, Zhanghao Sun, Zhiqi Chen, Ziyun Yang, Sanjay Nair, Divija Hasteer, Oren Rippel
What Matters in Practical Learned Image Compression
AuthorsKedar Tatwawadi, Parisa Rahimzadeh, Zhanghao Sun, Zhiqi Chen, Ziyun Yang, Sanjay Nair, Divija Hasteer, Oren Rippel
One of the major differentiators unlocked by learned codecs relative to their hard-coded traditional counterparts is their ability to be optimized directly to appeal to the human visual system. Despite this potential, a perceptual yet practical image codec is yet to be proposed. In this work, we aim to close this gap. We conduct a comprehensive study of the key modeling choices that govern the design of a practical learned image codec, jointly optimized for perceptual quality and runtime â including within the ablations several novel techniques. We then perform performance-aware neural architecture search over millions of backbone configurations to identify models that achieve the target on-device runtime while maximizing compression performance as captured by perceptual metrics. We combine the various optimizations to construct a new codec that achieves a significantly improved tradeoff between speed and perceptual quality. Based on rigorous subjective user studies, it provides 2.3â3x bitrate savings against AV1, AV2, VVC, ECM and JPEG-AI, and 20â40% bitrate savings against the best learned codec alternatives. At the same time, on an iPhone 17 Pro Max, it encodes 12MP images as fast as 230ms, and decodes them in 150ms â faster than most top ML-based codecs run on a V100 GPU.
Naturalistic Head Motion Generation From Speech
April 24, 2023research area Human-Computer Interaction, research area Speech and Natural Language Processingconference ICASSP
Synthesizing natural head motion to accompany speech for an embodied conversational agent is necessary for providing a rich interactive experience. Most prior works assess the quality of generated head motion by comparing them against a single ground-truth using an objective metric. Yet there are many plausible head motion sequences to accompany a speech utterance. In this work, we study the variation in the perceptual quality of head motionsâ¦
Neural Face Video Compression using Multiple Views
June 6, 2022research area Computer VisionWorkshop at CVPR
Recent advances in deep generative models led to the development of neural face video compression codecs that use an order of magnitude less bandwidth than engineered codecs. These neural codecs reconstruct the current frame by warping a source frame and using a generative model to compensate for imperfections in the warped source frame. Thereby, the warp is encoded and transmitted using a small number of keypoints rather than a dense flow field,â¦