Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Partially Performative Prediction
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Performative prediction studies feedback loops that arise when predictive models are deployed in consequential domains. In these settings, deploying a model can change the population whose patterns the model aims to predict, inducing a distribution shift that is endogenous to the learning system. This perspective departs from classical treatments of distribution shift, where shifts are typically modeled as exogenous changes in the data-generating process. Yet, in practice, distribution shift is rarely one or the other. Predictive models may influence future data through the decisions they support, while the world itself continues to drift for reasons beyond the learner's control. We study partially performative prediction, a framework that captures both endogenous and exogenous sources of distribution shift. The framework generalizes performative prediction by allowing the data distribution to evolve both in response to the deployed model and according to an external, time-varying process. We extend the central notions of performative stability and performative optimality to this setting by defining their online analogues that track the evolving partially performative environment. We analyze practical learning heuristics, including repeated retraining, and characterize when they successfully adapt to partially performative environments.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.