The flood of AI-focused funding has pushed global startup investment to record levels this year. But the vast majority of countries have not partaken in the gains.
So far in 2026, U.S. companies have pulled in nearly 80% of global seed- through growth-stage financing, per Crunchbase data. That’s a sharp divergence from the years leading up to the AI boom, when American companies typically secured less than half of all investment.
Gap for AI is even more pronounced
The U.S. share of artificial intelligence-related investment is even greater.
So far this year, nearly 88% of AI-related startup funding, or $319 billion, went to U.S.-headquartered companies, per Crunchbase data. Of that, most went to just two recipients, OpenAI and Anthropic.
Since both Anthropic and OpenAI are on track for public market debuts later this year, it’s possible next year’s comps will be less lopsided, as they won’t be raising any more giant late-stage financings. We’ll see.
Large venture hubs outperform small and mid-sized ones
Although no other country comes close to the U.S. for startup funding, a few of the larger technology investment hubs are seeing year-over-year gains.
Funding to China’s startups, in particular, is on the rise after several sluggish years. So far in 2026, startups have raised over $33 billion, per Crunchbase data, already surpassing the total for all of 2025.
The United Kingdom is also looking up. U.K.-based startups have pulled in $16.5 billion so far this year, compared to $19.5 billion in all of 2025. AI and fintech are the country’s leading sectors for investment.
Other mid-sized venture markets are seeing funding levels this year that are on track to be flat or moderately higher year over year, per Crunchbase data. In Europe, this includes France, Spain and Germany.
In Asia, India, Japan and South Korea are also neither way up nor way down. Canada and Australia, meanwhile, aren’t in a slump but also aren’t seeing any major AI-focused funding raised this year.
Maybe it’s a US bubble?
Now that more than three-fourths of startup funding is going to U.S. companies, it seems timely to note that the country is home to only a little over 4% of the global population.
On the tech startup front, it’s undoubtedly an impressive 4%. The U.S. has an unrivaled track record for building leading technology companies, along with the capital and talent to keep on doing so.
That said, certain trends do warrant some serious bubble consideration. The anomalously high concentration of startup funding into American companies is one of them.
Surely many of the countries in which the remaining 96% of people on Earth dwell possess entrepreneurial talent, infrastructure and economic might that could support more than just a measly 12% share of AI startup funding. If one was a betting type, it’s hard not to argue that the odds for that look pretty good.
Related Crunchbase queries:
- US Startup Funding In 2026
- Global Startup Funding In 2026 Not Including US
- Global AI Startup Funding In 2026 Not Including US
- US AI Startup Funding In 2026
Related reading:
Illustration: Dom Guzman
Stay up to date with recent funding rounds, acquisitions, and more with the Crunchbase Daily.