Ready to upgrade your television? This is an excellent time to buy a new TV or streaming device. Running from June 23 through June 26, the Prime Day TV deals are phenomenal—especially on art televisions like the Samsung Frame Pro and Amazon’s new Ember Artline.
Salivating over that new QLED or just need an entry-level TV for the kitchen? While Amazon has several of its own Fire TV models on sale, the latest sets from TCL, Hisense, and even Samsung are also heavily reduced—in some cases by almost 40 percent off. It's a good time to upgrade your big screen because some the best Prime Day tech deals are on TVs.
Also be sure to check out our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
Prime Day TV Deals
Even though it’s not the brand-new 2026 model, Samsung’s Frame Pro from 2025 is still a stellar option. Artwork looks stunning on the 65-inch matte display, especially when you are done watching Netflix and looking at Van Gogh oil paintings. Like the Amazon Ember Artline (see below), Samsung includes a wall-mounting bracket that makes this model sit close to the wall.
If you choose the 55-inch model of this art television, the Prime deal price is just $700. That’s several hundred dollars cheaper than the Samsung Frame Pro model (though the previous version of that popular Art TV is on sale as well, see above). The Ember Artline has a matte display, includes the bezels and wall mounting brackets, and looks stunning. You can generate AI artwork using Alexa+ or match art images to your room decor.
One of the best deals around this Prime Day is the Hisense U7 Mini-LED (2025). Powered by Google TV, the U7 has all the latest perks, like HDR10+, Dolby Vision IQ, Dolby Atmos, and IMAX Enhanced. For gamers, if you connect a high-end computer, the refresh rate can run as high as 165 Hz (or a 330 Hz variable refresh rate).
The already affordable TCL QM6K is a top seller, but at 20 percent off for Prime Day and priced at only $528, it’s quite a steal. The 65-inch model uses QLED display tech for bright colors and good contrast, even from a side viewing angle. Gamers will appreciate the 144 Hz refresh rate for low-latency performance, all powered by the intuitive Google TV operating system.
Deals on Streaming Devices
The Roku Ultra streamer has premium features like Dolby Vision and HDR10+ for excellent picture quality, a backlit remote, and good performance. In fact, the Ultra is about 30 percent faster than other Roku streaming products. You can even connect Bluetooth headphones or speakers, and the device supports Dolby Atmos surround sound.
To bump up the storage available to you, the Fire TV Stick 4K Max version is the one you want. You can add more apps and spend less time managing the cache and memory with 16 GB of local storage. This streaming device can also automatically display artwork, similar to the Ember Artline but without the sublime matte display tech we loved in our review.