Computer Science > Robotics
Title:DREAM-Chunk: Reactive Action Chunking with Latent World Model
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Action chunking has become a common interface for vision-language-action (VLA) models, enabling low-frequency policy inference to drive high-frequency robot execution. However, once an action chunk is committed, its open-loop execution can be brittle under stochastic dynamics, hardware execution errors, and partial observability. We propose DREAM-Chunk, a test-time scaling method that augments chunking-based policies with a lightweight latent world model, without requiring additional policy fine-tuning. At test time, DREAM-Chunk samples multiple candidate action chunks, rolls out their predicted latent futures, and selects actions from the chunk whose predicted state best matches the observed rollout. In this way, DREAM-Chunk uses additional test-time computation to cover multiple plausible stochastic futures and improve reactivity during long-horizon chunk execution. On the Kinetix benchmark, DREAM-Chunk improves robustness under increasing action noise and benefits from larger candidate sample sizes, especially when demonstrations contain corrective behaviors. We further validate DREAM-Chunk on four manipulation tasks across two robot platforms and two VLA policies under various sources of stochasticity. Across simulation and hardware experiments, DREAM-Chunk improves the robustness of action-chunking policies in stochastic dynamics.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.