Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Cooperative Long Rope Skipping via Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Humans exhibit remarkable motor agility, enabling a wide range of dynamic skills such as running and jumping, which highlights the great potential of humanoid robots for athletic locomotion. Among athletic sports, long rope skipping requires two rope turners to cooperatively swing the rope while adapting to a player under different jumping rhythms, making it a meaningful yet challenging task for humanoid robots. Although existing methods for humanoid sports have achieved success in single-agent and interaction-free settings, such as running, dancing, and parkour, task scenarios that require precise coordination among multiple participants remain largely unexplored. To this end, we propose Marope, a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework for cooperative long rope skipping with multiple humanoid robots. Specifically, Marope adopts a hierarchical reinforcement learning framework for policy training. At the lower level, it learns decentralized rope manipulation policies through MARL, while at the upper level, a centralized scheduling policy is trained to coordinate the execution of the lower-level policies. To improve generalization across different player behavioral styles, Marope further incorporates diverse jumping policies into cooperative game training. We evaluate our approach on Unitree G1 humanoid robots in both simulation and real-world settings. Experimental results demonstrate that Marope outperforms various baselines, achieving more efficient and stable rope manipulation as well as more robust and adaptable cooperation with varied players.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.