Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Optimized Multi-Contrast Self-Supervised MRI Reconstruction using Learned k-space Partitioning
View PDFAbstract:Objective: Deep Learning has shown promise in accelerating MRI by reconstructing high-quality images from under-sampled data. While recent work has leveraged multi-contrast information to improve reconstruction performance, these methods rely on supervised learning, which requires fully sampled k-space for training. One method, self-supervised learning via data undersampling (SSDU), enables direct training on under-sampled k-space by partitioning it into two sets, with a network mapping between the two. In this work, we improve MRI self-supervised MRI reconstruction with two modifications. Methods: We propose a multi-contrast self-supervised learning framework that jointly trains on multiple under-sampled contrasts without requiring fully sampled k-space data as a reference. Moreover, we learn an optimal self-supervised data partitioning for each contrast in an end-to-end manner, further enhancing reconstruction quality. Specifically, we learn an optimal partitioning probability distribution, which is sampled to generate a mask for partitioning. Results: Experiments on two publicly available multi-contrast MRI datasets demonstrate the improved reconstruction quality of our proposed self-supervised multi-contrast learned partitioning method compared to the current single-contrast self-supervised learning methods. We also demonstrate that learning the partitioning of k-space data further enhances the fidelity of reconstructions. Conclusion: Multi-contrast reconstruction combined with learned partitioning improves reconstruction fidelity over single-contrast self-supervised MRI reconstructions. Significance: Our method can facilitate higher image fidelity and/or accelerated MRI protocol times compared to previous self-supervised methods, and without requiring fully sampled k-space for training.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.