Quantum Physics
Title:Analog Quantum Asynchronous Event-Based Graph Neural Network
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Asynchronous, event-based graph neural networks (AEGNNs) have recently emerged as an efficient paradigm for processing the sparse and high-temporal-resolution data from event cameras. In this paper, we propose quantum analog AEGNNs (QA-AEGNNs), a novel framework to implement an AEGNN on a neutral-atom quantum computer. Neutral-atom quantum processors offer a programmable analog quantum computing platform based on controllable Rydberg-atom interactions. To this end, we map the streaming event data to an array of trapped neutral atoms, where each atom represents a graph node (event) and is positioned such that geometric proximity reflects the spatio-temporal neighborhood of events. The native Rydberg Hamiltonian of the quantum processor is programmed to mirror the message-passing computations of the AEGNN, with atomic qubit states serving as node feature embeddings and inter-atom interactions realizing graph edges. Furthermore, we propose a hybrid quantum-classical training scheme in which the analog Hamiltonian parameters (e.g., laser pulse amplitudes and detunings) are optimized using classical feedback to learn the quantum AEGNN model from data. Our approach leverages the continuous Hamiltonian dynamics and massive parallelism of neutral-atom quantum systems to natively execute event-based graph computations with potential accuracy improvements
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.