Physics > Atmospheric and Oceanic Physics
Title:Rigorous uncertainty quantification of probabilistic AI weather forecasts with conformal prediction
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Probabilistic weather forecasting is undergoing rapid transformation with artificial intelligence (AI). In traditional numerical weather prediction, computing power can limit how well ensemble forecasts approximate the unknown statistical distribution of future states. AI models facilitate larger ensembles and are trained with probabilistic considerations, ideally leading to better uncertainty quantification. Forecasts from these state-of-the-art models are often considered well-calibrated. However, here we show that the statistical coverage of such models, the ultimate measure of calibration, can struggle, especially on extreme events. To address this shortcoming, we employ conformal prediction, a class of statistical methods that mathematically guarantees coverage under no distributional assumptions, unlike previous post-processing techniques. We apply online conformal prediction to temperature and precipitation forecasts (including extremes) of three leading global weather models, GenCast, NeuralGCM, and AIFS-ENS, ensuring calibrated uncertainty at no expense to other probabilistic metrics. This post-processing method can be applied to any forecasting model.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.