Most of us are stuck placing our router in a less-than-optimal spot, depending on where the internet connection comes into our home. Mesh routers promise to extend Wi-Fi coverage by enabling you to place a second or third node wherever you need, and they appear as a unified Wi-Fi network. Your devices will automatically connect to the nearest option for the best speeds.
Whether you want to fix dead zones, stop the buffering in the back bedroom, or get decent Wi-Fi in the backyard, a mesh Wi-Fi system could be the answer. The Netgear Orbi 770 Series is my top pick for most people, but I have many alternatives to suit different homes and internet connections.
- Best Mesh: Netgear Orbi 770 Series (3-Pack)
- Best Subscription-Free Mesh: Asus ZenWiFi BT10 (2-Pack)
- Upgrade Pick: Asus ZenWifi BQ16 Pro (2-Pack)
- Best for Simplicity: Amazon Eero Pro 7 (3-Pack)
- Best Budget: TP-Link Deco BE63 (3-Pack)
- Best Wi-Fi 6 Mesh: Asus ZenWiFi XT8 (2-Pack)
- Best Outdoor Mesh: TP-Link Deco BE25 Outdoor (1-Pack)
Before you dive deeper into my lineup, it’s a good idea to consider whether a mesh system is right for you. My guide on how to choose a router will help you answer that question and determine the features you need. If you don't want to switch to a new Wi-Fi mesh system, I also have advice on upgrading your existing Wi-Fi, the best Wi-Fi extenders, and ways to secure and protect your home network.
Updated June 2026: I added the Eero Pro 7 and TP-Link Deco BE63, refreshed impressions for other recommendations, added clarifications on the US government’s foreign router ban, slimmed down the other routers I've tested section, and removed some older devices.
- Best Mesh System
- Best Subscription-Free Mesh
- Upgrade Pick
- Best for Simplicity
- Best Budget Mesh Router
- Best Wi-Fi 6 Mesh
- Best Outdoor Mesh Router
- Best Mesh Wi-Fi Systems Comparison Table
- Other Wi-Fi 7 Mesh Systems I Liked
- More Wi-Fi 6 or 6E Mesh Systems I Liked
- Mesh Systems I Don’t Recommend
- Mesh Wi-Fi Systems: Your Questions, Answered
Best Mesh System
If you're excited to upgrade to Wi-Fi 7, the Netgear Orbi 770 Series may be the best way to do so. While most new phones and laptops already support the standard, router prices are only just becoming more affordable. The Orbi 770 is backward compatible with older devices, but you will need a Wi-Fi 7 device, like an iPhone 16 or iPhone 17, to take full advantage of the benefits.
These towering routers aren’t quite as big as the far more expensive Orbi 970 Series, but they have a similar design and are relatively large. The main router has four 2.5 Gbps Ethernet ports, while the satellites make do with two 2.5 Gbps ports apiece. There’s no USB. Setup is quick and easy using the Orbi app on your phone.
It is a tri-band system, and by default, there is one network name (SSID) for the 2.4-GHz, 5-GHz, and 6-GHz bands, and it supports multi-link operation (MLO). MLO is a new Wi-Fi 7 feature that allows devices to connect on multiple bands simultaneously. While a single SSID simplifies things, MLO can cause problems for legacy devices because Wi-Fi 7 has more stringent security requirements (WPA2 or higher). Something like an iPhone 5 won’t be able to connect, though you could potentially use a guest or IoT network.
Wi-Fi 7 also enables wider channels (up to 320 MHz from the current high of 160 MHz) and a handful of other improvements. You can expect consistently fast Wi-Fi and excellent coverage from this system (Netgear optimistically suggests up to 8,000 square feet for a three-pack). I found it fast and stable, and it had no issues covering my home. While it is slower than some other systems I tested, you are unlikely to notice the difference in everyday use unless you are constantly transferring large files. It offers more than enough bandwidth for streaming and gaming. There's potential for stable, low-latency, multi-gigabit speeds if you have Wi-Fi 7 devices connected to the main router, but I occasionally encountered a touch of lag with the satellites. If you can run Ethernet cables for wired backhaul, you can eliminate that.
The Orbi app is straightforward and shows connected clients, enables you to check your internet speed, and has a few other settings. You get 30-day trials of Netgear’s Armor security software (powered by Bitdefender) and Smart Parental Controls, but after that, Armor (phishing and malware protection, device and network scanning) costs $40 for the first year, then jumps to $100, and the parental controls (profiles, age-appropriate filters, scheduling, and time limits) are $8 per month. You don't need either of these pricey subscriptions.
Unless you have a large home and a multi-gig internet connection (over 2.5 Gbps), this mesh is likely to be indistinguishable from more expensive mesh systems, like the TP-Link Deco BE85 ($1,000), Eero Max 7 ($1,700), and Netgear Orbi 970 Series ($1,800). In my previous modern home, I rarely noticed the enhanced performance of the much pricier 970 over the 770, and a two-pack will more than suffice for most folks. If your internet connection is faster than 2.5 Gbps, consider the excellent Netgear Orbi 870 (3-Pack) at $1,064. Watch out for frequent discounts on all of these systems.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi version | Wi-Fi 7 |
| Bands | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | One 2.5 Gbps WAN, three 2.5 Gbps LAN (main), two 2.5 Gbps LAN (satellites) |
| Size | 5.28 x 9.88 x 3.95 inches |
Best Subscription-Free Mesh
This Wi-Fi 7 mesh system topped nearly all of my tests, delivering strong coverage and impressive throughput. It is a tri-band system (2.4 GHz, 5 GHz, and 6 GHz ) that uses MLO for a reliable wireless backhaul between the main router and mesh node. While I originally tested a two-pack in a modern, 1,600-square-foot home, the BT10 recently proved powerful enough for my challenging old Victorian house, which features thick stone walls and dampening rubble between the floors. Each unit also includes two 10-Gbps Ethernet ports, one Gigabit port, and a USB 3.0 port.
The BT10 is highly versatile—a hallmark of Asus systems—and can be configured via the mobile app or the web interface. Asus continues to offer comprehensive security software and parental controls at no extra cost, making this a great choice if you want to avoid monthly subscriptions. Competitors like Netgear, TP-Link, and Eero all charge for these extras. Just be aware that using AiProtection Pro means sharing data with Trend Micro, so you may want to review their privacy policy first. Once set up, the parental controls allow you to easily create profiles, schedule bedtimes, filter content by age, and review online activity.
The BT10 is a feature-rich system. The Quality of Service option makes it easy to prioritize activities like working from home, gaming, or streaming, and you can limit bandwidth for specific devices. The BT10 also supports VPN services and 4G or 5G tethering. Asus gives you more access to tinker than most manufacturers. I appreciate having access to a wealth of settings, but you should be prepared to do a little tweaking and troubleshooting.
When I initially tested the BT10, I was hesitant to recommend it due to buggy firmware and overall system instability. I had trouble with my Sonos speakers disappearing (this may be the fault of Sonos), and my Pixel 9 dropping connection repeatedly, requiring a reset. But I’m pleased to report that the latest firmware seems to have stabilized things, and the BT10 has come down in price. I used it over the busy holiday period, and it was rock solid, offering impressive speed and range, excellent node performance for a wireless backhaul, and silky smooth transfer speeds on my home network, where I recently set up a NAS server. An issue I had with one PC was resolved by binding it to the main router. It hasn’t been flawless (my Pixel 10 Pro XL still sometimes drops connection when handing off between nodes, though it generally rights itself within a few seconds).
While I had a much better experience the second time around—with the BT10 comfortably outperforming the Deco BE67 it replaced in my home—mixed online reviews suggest your mileage may vary. Still, the potential reward is top-notch, subscription-free networking. If you want most of these benefits in a slightly slower but significantly cheaper package, the Asus BT8 (listed below) is a great alternative.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi Version | Wi-Fi 7 |
| Bands | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | One 10 Gbps WAN/LAN, one 10 Gbps LAN, and one Gigabit WAN/LAN, one USB 3.0 |
| Size | 6.25 x 7.32 x 2.83 inches |
Upgrade Pick
Topping my charts in almost every test, this is the fastest mesh system I have reviewed. It delivers speedy, stable Wi-Fi across an impressively wide area using a quad-band setup—adding a second 6-GHz band to the usual 2.4-, 5-, and 6-GHz bands. Packed with versatile features, it takes full advantage of everything Wi-Fi 7 has to offer.
I tested a two-pack of the BQ16 Pro, which looks similar to the BT10 but is slightly larger to accommodate the internal antennas needed for its expansive coverage (Asus claims up to 8,000 square feet). This system handled my thick-walled old home admirably, delivering a far stronger signal to the furthest rooms than any other system I’ve tested. I even managed to get a reliable connection in my garage, which is usually a complete dead spot.
Setup was a breeze using the Asus Router app on my phone, though it’s best to keep the node close until it’s up and running. Each unit has two 10-Gbps Ethernet ports, three Gigabit ports, and a USB 3.0 port. It’s perfect for a multi-gig internet connection, and you could run wired backhaul to maximize speeds throughout your home.
Everything you could want is included here, from free parental controls and security software to VPN support and Quality of Service options to prioritize specific activities or devices. This mesh is a dream for power users who love delving into settings and playing around. Because it was originally released in 2024, the BQ16 Pro has benefited from several firmware updates and is now rock-solid. I experienced no early bugs, and no new issues have emerged over the past three months of testing. This is the system I consistently return to after testing others.
As great as it is, the BQ16 Pro is overkill for most folks. The BT10 is almost as good and will likely serve just fine in most homes. But if you have a large house or thick walls and dampening, like I do, you will notice the upgrade. Provided you don’t mind spending the cash, this is the best mesh system on the market.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi Version | Wi-Fi 7 |
| Bands | 2x 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | One 10-Gbps WAN/LAN, one 10-Gbps LAN, one Gigabit WAN/LAN, two Gigabit LANs, one USB 3.0 |
| Size | 6.9 x 8.6 x 2.8 inches |
Best for Simplicity
Amazon’s Eero mesh systems are the easiest to set up, offer fairly wide coverage, and deliver stable connectivity. The Eero Pro 7 is an elegant system, available as two or three identical routers. Eero switched to a tower design to enable a better antenna array for wider coverage, but the Pro 7 units still blend in easily on a table or shelf. Each one has a USB-C port for power and two Ethernet ports rated at 5 Gbps. Designed as a hands-off, set-and-forget system, it fully supports Wi-Fi 7 across the 2.4-GHz, 5-GHz, and 6-GHz bands.
The Eero Pro 7 is a strong performer, delivering impressively low lag and stable bandwidth sharing across many devices, with zero drops during my testing. The mobile app is straightforward, allowing you to easily view connected devices, pause the internet, and set up a guest network. You can also create profiles to group devices and set schedules. Unfortunately, unlocking content filtering, advanced security, ad blocking, and deeper activity insights requires a costly Eero Plus subscription ($10 per month or $100 per year).
Eero is an Amazon company, and its routers come with Alexa support. Enable the Eero skill, and you can pause the internet with a voice command through your Echo device, which is handy when your child won’t get off the computer to eat dinner. The Eero Pro 7 also supports Matter and Thread, and it can double as a Zigbee smart home hub just like an Echo device. This allows you to directly connect compatible smart lighting, locks, and other accessories, making it a great choice if you have a lot of smart home gear.
Two other tricks make an Eero mesh network attractive. An Echo (4th Gen), Echo Dot (4th or 5th Gen), or Echo Dot with clock (4th or 5th Gen) smart speaker can act as a Wi-Fi extender, offering an extra 1,000 square feet of coverage at speeds up to 100 Mbps for up to 10 devices. Eero also offers an Internet Backup option, so you can add multiple backup networks (Wi-Fi or hotspot) to keep you online if your main wired network goes down.
Eero’s simplicity will appeal to anyone who hates digging into settings, but there’s a cost. You won’t find any Quality of Service features for prioritizing traffic, and you can’t separate Wi-Fi bands. And while the two Ethernet ports allow for a wired backhaul, using them leaves no room to plug in other wired devices. While basic Eero systems sometimes suffer from slow transfer speeds, that wasn't an issue with the Pro 7. It offers slick and smooth tri-band Wi-Fi 7 at a reasonable price, making it the sweet spot in Eero's current lineup.
A few Eero systems on the market are worth considering, delivering a broadly similar experience. The first two are dual-band systems (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz). Although the basic Eero 6 ($200) was one of the slower systems I tested, particularly at longer distances, it is likely perfectly fine for modest needs and internet plans up to 500 Mbps. If you have a faster connection, up to 1 Gbps, and a home smaller than 4,500 square feet, then the Eero 6+ ($300) is a great step up.
If you want a Wi-Fi 7 system for a smaller home, consider the Eero 7 ($350). While it is only a dual-band system—meaning you'll miss out on the faster 6-GHz band—you still get other Wi-Fi 7 advantages like including MLO and enhanced security. It performed respectably in my tests with solid speeds, but its limited range means it won't be a good fit for everyone. It includes a 2.5 Gbps port, but I'd look elsewhere if your internet plan is faster than 1 Gbps. The Eero 7 only performed slightly better than the 6+ and was beaten by the Eero Pro 6E ($450). Considering that a three-pack of the Pro 6E frequently drops below $400, it's a better buy.
Anyone with larger properties or above-average demands (lots of devices and people simultaneously using the internet) might consider the top-of-the-line Eero Max 7 ($1,700), which boasts four Ethernet ports, two rated at 10 Gbps and two at 2.5 Gbps. This solution will be overkill for most people. If you want a stronger signal in your backyard this summer, you can also snag an Eero 7 Outdoor ($400) to pair with any of these systems, though I have not tested it yet.
All Eero systems are compatible with each other, making it easy to expand your network by adding new nodes to your setup. You can dive deeper into the differences in our Eero buying guide. But whichever model you choose, keep an eye out for frequent discounts.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi Version | Wi-Fi 7 |
| Bands | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | Two 5 Gbps WAN/LAN |
| Size | 5.8 x 7 x 3 inches |
Best Budget Wi-Fi 7 Mesh Router
This tri-band Wi-Fi 7 mesh system is cheaper than our top pick and almost as good. The cylindrical routers feature the classic, vase-like Deco design that blends easily into most rooms, complete with a subtle "7" on the front. Setup is quick and easy; the main router automatically detected the satellite nodes as soon as I powered them on to form a mesh network. Each unit also includes four 2.5-Gbps auto-sensing Ethernet ports and a USB 3.0 port.
Performance was consistently good throughout my home, with fast speeds at close and medium range—though our top pick, the Orbi 770 Series, still outperformed it in most scenarios. By default, the 6-GHz band is set up as a separate network and MLO is switched off. Testing with my Pixel 10 Pro XL at close range (up to 8 feet), I saw download speeds up to 100 Mbps faster on the 6-GHz band compared to 5-GHz, but this dropped sharply with distance. Just one room over, the 6-GHz signal was visibly weaker. I also experienced some lag with PC gaming while connected to a satellite node, so gamers will definitely want to connect directly to the main router or use a wired backhaul. If you want to take advantage of 6 GHz for wireless backhaul, you can’t have the routers too far apart or with too many obstacles, or you will have dead zones.
Disappointingly, the free tier of HomeShield offers only limited security, and Security+ costs $5 a month or $36 a year for web and intrusion protection with notifications and reports, while Total Security costs $70 a year for the first year ($130 per year after) and adds antivirus for devices, VPN service, and a password manager. Advanced Parental Controls require a second subscription costing $3 a month or $18 a year for time limits, downtime scheduling, rewards, app time limits, safe search, insights, and reports. Quality of Service allows you to prioritize specific devices and set bandwidth allowances. There is also a mixed-mode security option for WPA2 and WPA3. You can also split the 2.4-GHz and 5-GHz bands and create guest or IoT networks.
The Deco app and web interface are solid but fairly limited in terms of options. The app was able to identify many of the devices on my network, but this required me to share data with a third-party. There is an option to run a speed test on the router to see what your ISP delivers, which is handy. Ultimately, this 3-pack gave me reliable and speedy internet throughout my home and garden.
TP-Link offers a dizzying array of similar mesh systems, a few of which I break down below. In terms of both price and performance, the BE63 sits just below the BE67 and the flagship BE85. (The UK equivalent is the BE65, though it doesn't perform quite as well due to local limitations on the 6-GHz band.) Ultimately, frequent discounts make the BE63 a very tempting entry point for anyone looking to try their first Wi-Fi 7 mesh.
Note: Even before the recent US ban on foreign-made routers, the government was already considering a ban on TP-Link due to reports that vulnerabilities in its routers were exploited in high-profile, state-linked cyberattacks. According to The Wall Street Journal, the Commerce, Defense, and Justice departments are investigating the company, though no evidence of deliberate wrongdoing has been found. TP-Link president Jeff Barney told WIRED that the company is cooperating fully with the investigation, noting that TP-Link is now headquartered in California, operates a transparent supply chain out of Vietnam, and has split from TP-Link Technologies that focuses on mainland China. Still, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton sued TP-Link in February, alleging the company allows the Chinese Communist Party to access American consumers’ devices. The impending ban will certainly impact TP-Link, which has not yet secured Conditional Approval.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi Version | Wi-Fi 7 |
| Bands | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | Four 2.5 Gbps WAN/LAN |
| Size | 4.23 × 6.93 × 4.23 inches |
Best Wi-Fi 6 Mesh
The combination of speedy performance, impressive range, and lots of extra features means the Asus ZenWiFi XT8 is the best Wi-Fi 6 mesh system and it topped this guide before Wi-Fi 7 was released. I tested the two-pack, and the straightforward setup through the mobile app took minutes, though you have to keep the node close by during setup and then move it. This is a tri-band Wi-Fi 6 system with one 2.4-GHz band and two 5-GHz bands (one is reserved for wireless backhaul). Available in black or white, these units are fairly large, but they're unobtrusive and look classy, with side vents to help dissipate heat. Each router offers three gigabit Ethernet ports, a 2.5 gigabit WAN port, and a USB 3.1 port.
At short, medium, or long range, the XT8 was consistently one of the fastest Wi-Fi 6 systems I tested, and speeds never dropped. The inclusion of AiProtection Pro, which adds anti-malware and parental controls powered by Trend Micro, is very welcome, especially since it doesn’t require a subscription, unlike most competitors. Just remember that using AiProtection means sharing your data with Trend Micro, so you might want to read its privacy policy. I like the parental controls, too. You can set up and reuse profiles, schedule bedtimes, filter by age group, and review activity. The Quality of Service option lets you prioritize activities like working from home, gaming, or streaming, and you can limit bandwidth for specific devices.
The mobile app offers a wealth of customization options, while the web interface provides even deeper access to advanced settings. It’s easy to split bands or set up a guest network. I also found that the app recognized most devices correctly. (Sometimes it’s difficult to identify devices from the attributed hardware names in router apps.) There's support for AiMesh, which means you can easily add other Asus routers to expand your Wi-Fi system. The dedicated backhaul channel—the way the router speaks to its nodes and vice versa—is extremely fast, ensuring you get the full speed of your internet connection even from that node you placed near the backyard.
The major caveat with this mesh is that it can take some tinkering to get it working well for your home. If a failed firmware update is your idea of hell or you can’t face trial and error with settings, pick one of the other systems recommended here. My XT8 node initially refused to update its firmware, which took a couple of attempts to fix. I also had an issue with my Sonos speakers disappearing, which required a factory reset. Overall, using the XT8 was a smooth experience, and I used it for a couple of years off and on. With a little patience and research, it’s easy for just about anyone to operate, but the depth of options will satisfy power users. You can find open source firmware if you want to go down the rabbit hole.
I also tested the slightly upgraded version of this mesh, the Asus ZenWiFi XT9 ($400). It appears identical but offers a few upgrades beneath the hood. The 5-GHz band features a 160-MHz channel width—theoretically doubling the XT8’s bandwidth—alongside a slightly more powerful processor and support for link aggregation. On the downside, just like with the XT8, I had some early issues with the XT9 that required a firmware upgrade and some tweaks to the settings. It’s slightly better than the XT8, so if you see it at a similar price, I would go for the XT9 instead.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi Version | Wi-Fi 6 |
| Bands | 2x 5 GHz and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | One 2.5 Gbps WAN, three Gigabit LAN, one USB 3.1 |
| Size | 6.3 x 6.36 x 2.95 inches |
Best Outdoor Mesh Router
Whether you want to watch a movie on your phone while sunbathing, crank the tunes at your barbecue, or stay online in your garden office, this router is a great way to get a better Wi-Fi signal into your backyard and outbuildings.
The thing about selecting an outdoor mesh Wi-Fi router to join your network is that you really need to pick something compatible, so folks with an Eero system should look at the Eero 7 Outdoor, and anyone with an Asus system should consider the ZenWiFi BD5 Outdoor. I picked the Deco BE25 here as it strikes a nice balance between price and performance, and it’s a Wi-Fi 7 router.
You get fixings that enable you to wall- or pole-mount this outdoor mesh router, or you can set it on a table. It's waterproof and dustproof, with an IP65 rating, and has survived a typical wet Scottish summer without any issues. TP-Link suggests it can cover around 2,800 square feet, and it has no problem filling my backyard and beyond with speedy connectivity.
The base screws open to accommodate the power cable with a rubber seal, but you will need an outdoor socket or extension within reach. Even better, this model supports Power-over-Ethernet (PoE), so you can hook it up to your network and power it with a single Ethernet cable. It has two 2.5 Gbps Ethernet ports.
I tested with the Deco BE67 system above, and it formed a mesh with no problem. It is only a dual-band Wi-Fi 7 mesh system, so there’s no 6 GHz, but it delivered solid speeds on the 2.4-GHz and 5-GHz bands, despite a distance between it and the nearest node and the fact that it was relying on wireless backhaul. It offers basic security and parental controls, though you need to upgrade to Security+ at $5 a month or $36 for the year and Advanced Parental Controls at $3 a month or $18 a year to unlock all the features.
| Specs | |
|---|---|
| Wi-Fi Version | Wi-Fi 7 |
| Bands | 5 GHz and 2.4 GHz |
| Ports | Two 2.5 Gbps WAN/LAN (PoE) |
| Size | 4.3 x 8.5 x 4.8 inches |
Best Mesh Wi-Fi Systems, Compared
| Mesh Wi-Fi Systems | Price (MSRP) | Wi-Fi Version | Bands | Ports | Suggested Coverage |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Best Mesh: Netgear Orbi 770 Series (3-Pack) | $655 | Wi-Fi 7 | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz | One 2.5 Gbps-WAN, three 2.5-Gbps LAN (main), two 2.5-Gbps LAN (satellites) | 8,000 square feet |
| Best Subscription-Free Mesh: Asus ZenWiFi BT10 (2-Pack) | $580 | Wi-Fi 7 | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz | One 10-Gbps WAN/LAN, one 10-Gbps LAN, and one Gigabit WAN/LAN, one USB 3.0 | 6,000 square feet |
| Upgrade Pick: Asus ZenWifi BQ16 Pro (2-Pack) | $930 | Wi-Fi 7 | 2x 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz | One 10-Gbps WAN/LAN, one 10-Gbps LAN, one Gigabit WAN/LAN, two Gigabit LANs, one USB 3.0 | 8,000 square feet |
| Best for Simplicity: Amazon Eero Pro 7 (3-Pack) | $700 | Wi-Fi 7 | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz | Two 5-Gbps WAN/LAN | 6,000 square feet |
| Best Budget: TP-Link Deco BE63 (3-Pack) | $357 | Wi-Fi 7 | 6 GHz, 5 GHz, and 2.4 GHz | Four 2.5-Gbps WAN/LAN, one USB 3.0 | 7,600 square feet |
| Best Wi-Fi 6 Mesh: Asus ZenWiFi XT8 (2-Pack) | $329 | Wi-Fi 6 | 2x 5 GHz and 1x 2.4 GHz | One 2.5-Gbps WAN, three Gigabit LAN, one USB 3.1 | 5,500 square feet |
| Best Outdoor Mesh: TP-Link Deco BE25 Outdoor (1-Pack) | $135 | Wi-Fi 7 | 5 GHz and 2.4 GHz | Two 2.5-Gbps WAN/LAN (PoE) | 2,800 square feet |
Other Wi-Fi 7 Mesh Systems I Liked
As mesh Wi-Fi systems grow in popularity, you have more options than ever to choose from. While the following options didn't quite make our top picks, several only narrowly missed the cut and are still well worth considering.
Asus ZenWifi BD5 Outdoor for $194: While I listed the cheaper TP-Link Deco BE25 as my top outdoor pick, you should always choose a node that is compatible with your existing mesh system. If you are running an Asus setup, the BD5 Outdoor is the way to go. It features dual-band Wi-Fi 7, an IP65 weather-resistant rating, and two 2.5-Gbps PoE ports—allowing you to power the unit and run a wired backhaul over a single Ethernet cable. Thanks to AiMesh support, it integrated flawlessly with the three different Asus systems I tested it with, and it will easily blanket your backyard in strong Wi-Fi.
TP-Link Deco BE67 (2-Pack) for $430: This tri-band Wi-Fi 7 mesh is a little cheaper than our top pick but offers similar performance. The setup was a little glitchy for me. Each unit has one 10-Gbps Ethernet port, one 2.5-Gbps port, a Gigabit port, and a USB 3.0 port. Performance was consistently impressive throughout my home, with some of the fastest speeds I have recorded at close and medium range. The BE67 falls between the BE63 and the flagship BE85, and might be the sweet spot in TP-Link’s lineup. The Deco BE68 is the same system as the BE67, but exclusive to Best Buy.
Netgear Orbi 370 Series (3-Pack) for $300: While it is great that manufacturers offer budget-friendly options, dual-band Wi-Fi 7 mesh routers are a tough sell. Not only do you miss out on the 6-GHz band, but the 5-GHz band must be shared between your devices and the wireless backhaul traffic connecting the nodes. In my thick-walled Victorian home, this resulted in terrible performance for anything connected to a satellite node. Even after extensive tinkering with the Orbi 370, I struggled to get more than 15 Mbps from a node despite having a 1 Gbps internet connection. While it is an affordable system that offers the same easy setup as our top pick, there are simply too many caveats for me to fully recommend it.
TP-Link Deco BE25 (3-Pack) for $200: Almost everything I just said about the Orbi 370 Series applies to the dual-band Wi-Fi 7 Deco BE25. But, this mesh is cheaper, the units are smaller and disc-shaped, and they’re all identical, with two 2.5 Gbps each. Speed and range on the 5-GHz band were better with Netgear’s 370 Series, but the opposite was true on the 2.4-GHz band.
Netgear Orbi 870 (3-Pack) for $1,064: This tri-band mesh from Netgear is a step up on the 770 Series above, adding a 10-Gbps WAN/LAN port and doubling the bandwidth on the 5- and 6-GHz bands. My experience with the 870 Series was flawless. The setup was straightforward, performance was top-notch on every band and at various distances, and this mesh system was near the top of the table in all my tests. It also proved extremely stable and had no trouble covering my entire home and garden. The only reason the 870 doesn’t appear above is that the 770 is likely enough for most folks, but if your internet connection is faster than 2.5 Gbps, this is what I recommend.
Asus ZenWiFi BT8 (3-Pack) for $850: Based on its mostly stellar speed and range, the tri-band BT8 is a Wi-Fi 7 mesh worth considering. Sadly, the highs were hamstrung by inconsistent performance and perplexing intermittent lag, which made testing the BT8 a frustrating roller-coaster experience. A step down from the BT10 but still more than fast enough for most homes with 2.5-Gbps or slower internet connections, the BT8 was a breeze to install, offered impressive speeds across all three bands, and delivered excellent range. Consider the subscription-free parental controls and security software, and the BT8 looks like a real contender. While the release firmware was poor, this system is now consistently stable, and Asus has started to offer tempting discounts.
TP-Link Deco BE85 (2-Pack) for $700: The Deco BE85 was TP-Link's first Wi-Fi 7 mesh. As the flagship, it offers unrivaled performance, with double the bandwidth of the more affordable BE63 listed above. Each router boasts four auto-sensing WAN/LAN Ethernet ports, two 10-Gbps ports (one is an SFP combo), two 2.5-Gbps ports, and a USB 3.0 port. It delivered wide coverage and excellent performance in my tests, but unless you have a very fast multi-gig internet connection and loads of Wi-Fi 7 devices, it will be overkill for your home.
Netgear Orbi 970 (2-Pack) for $1,300: There’s no denying that the tri-band Wi-Fi 7 Netgear Orbi 970 is an impressive quad-band mesh. This mesh system is incredibly fast, reliable, and provides expansive coverage with plenty of high-speed Ethernet ports. However, the astronomical price makes it hard to recommend. You can get similar performance for less, and full parental controls now require a separate subscription from the security software. Ultimately, this system is only worth considering if you have a large home, a multi-gig connection, and a generous budget.
More Wi-Fi 6 or 6E Mesh Systems I Liked
TP-Link Deco XE70 Pro (3-Pack) for $250: Support for Wi-Fi 6E, which operates on the 6-GHz band, is common, but with Wi-Fi 7 rolling out, 6E routers and mesh systems like this are falling in price. A two-pack of this tri-band mesh system is relatively affordable and enough to cover most homes, making this perhaps the best Wi-Fi 6E mesh for most people. I also tested the XE75 ($270 for a three-pack), which is almost identical, but has three Gigabit ports and no multi-Gig. There is also the XE75 Pro ($400 for a three-pack), which features the 2.5-Gbps port and theoretically offers slightly more bandwidth but is far more expensive. Since TP-Link frequently discounts its products, the standard model is the best choice for most people—though multi-gig users should opt for the Pro.
TP-Link Deco X50 Outdoor for $150: This was our previous outdoor pick, and it’s still a good dual-band Wi-Fi 6 router that will form a mesh with any Deco system (I tested with the Deco X50 4G). It’s a solid performer, but with the Wi-Fi 7 BE25 Outdoor coming in around the same price, I’d pick that instead.
TP-Link Deco X55 (3-Pack) for $150: This affordable Wi-Fi 6 mesh delivers decent coverage and performance, with optional parental controls and antivirus protection, making it ideal for a modest family home. This is a dual-band system (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz). There are two gigabit Ethernet ports on each router. Coverage and speeds are solid, falling short of the Asus XT8 but beating systems like the entry-level Eero 6.
Google Nest Wifi Pro (3-Pack) for $400: Mesh systems don’t come much simpler than this. Google’s Nest Wifi Pro is a tri-band (2.4, 5, and 6 GHz) Wi-Fi 6E system that works via Google Home, and each router sports two 1-gigabit ports. The setup is super simple, coverage and performance were solid and consistent, and my testing was refreshingly free from glitches and buffering, though WIRED editor Julian Chokkattu had issues that Google's customer support could not fix. The Nest Wifi Pro came mid-table in raw speed at short, mid, and long range, and settings in the Home app are very bare-bones. Disappointingly, it is not backward compatible with older Nest routers.
TP-Link Deco X20 (3-Pack) for $130: The Deco X20 is an affordable Wi-Fi 6 mesh that delivers decent coverage and performance, with optional parental controls and antivirus protection, making it ideal for an average family home. This dual-band (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz) mesh was our budget pick for a long time, and there are two gigabit Ethernet ports on each router. Coverage and speeds are decent, falling short of the Asus XT8 but beating systems like the entry-level Eero 6. The app is straightforward, and it’s easy to set up a guest network. Originally released with the free HomeCare software, this has since changed to a HomeShield system, so it’s not as good a bargain as it once was.
Linksys Velop Pro 6E (2-Pack) for $280: Once up and running, this tri-band (2.4 GHz, 5 GHz, and 6 GHz) Wi-Fi 6E system offers impressive range and decent speeds. It is competitively priced with quite a few dips in cost (don't pay full price), comes with basic parental controls, and offers handy features like device prioritization and a guest network. But I had a terrible time with the installation. The app continually failed partway through the process, and I had to factory reset the routers. Even then, it took multiple attempts to add the nodes. It’s also not backward compatible with older Velop “Intelligent Mesh” systems, because this is a “Cognitive Mesh” system.
TP-Link XE200 (2-Pack) for $290: This tri-band Wi-Fi 6E mesh system (2.4 GHz, 5 GHz, and 6 GHz) was fast, offered consistently wide coverage, and blew away the Wi-Fi 6 competition at close range. I downloaded a 50-GB game in 20 minutes and didn’t encounter any issues during testing. As it uses the 6 GHz band for backhaul, you have to think about placement and try to keep routers in sight of each other and within 50 feet (or better, connect them via Ethernet cable). While the XE200 is better than the XE70 Pro above, it’s simply too expensive, though it has seen some deep discounts recently, so keep an eye out for deals.
TP-Link Deco X50 PoE (3-Pack) for $273: This inconspicuous puck-sized router can be wall- or ceiling-mounted for rooms where a mesh with wireless backhaul just won’t cut it. You must run an Ethernet cable to the router, but because it supports PoE, the cable delivers power too. This dual-band Wi-Fi 6 router (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz) has a 2.5-Gbps WAN port and a 1-gigabit LAN port and can cover up to 2,500 square feet.
Gryphon AX (2-Pack) for $499: After some trouble setting up this tri-band Wi-Fi 6 system, I found it performed well and coped with multiple streams and devices without complaint. The app is a little glitchy, but it boasts comprehensive parental controls. If you want enhanced security, ad blocking, and the option to route traffic through your router when you or your family are out of the home—which allows for 24/7 monitoring of your kids’ online activities—you need to purchase Gryphon’s Premium plan for an extra $8 per month or $90 per year. But unless you require that level of oversight, this system is just too expensive, and it didn’t match our top pick for speed or coverage.
Mesh Systems I Don’t Recommend
They can't all be winners. These are the mesh systems I had trouble with or can't recommend for one reason or another.
Acer Predator Connect T7: I had high hopes for this Acer system, as the company has considerable prowess in computing, but my excitement at a relatively new mesh player was short-lived because the half-baked Predator Connect T7 is a mess. The installation was buggy, the firmware update repeatedly failed, and even when I got it up and running, it proved to be one of the least stable systems I have ever tried. The band steering is poor and frequently dumped me onto the slowest 2.4-GHz band. The T7 also dropped my connection multiple times a day, froze video calls, and was a general pain.
Asus ZenWiFi BD4 (3-Pack) for $290: One of the first Wi-Fi 7 mesh systems from Asus that might be described as affordable, the BD4 looks like an interesting prospect on paper. Each unit has two 2.5-Gbps ports; installation was easy, and you get the usual subscription-free parental controls and security software. But is a dual-band Wi-Fi 7 mesh a good idea? You don’t get the faster 6-GHz band, and if you plan to use wireless backhaul, speeds will suffer for connected devices, although the BD4 can employ MLO to connect on both bands simultaneously. Sadly, I found the BD4 was erratic. A firmware update failed, and I had to factory reset. My internet also dropped several times, and I had to keep resetting my modem.
Vilo 6 (2-Pack): The original Vilo system impressed with an impossibly low $60 price for a three-pack, but it did not support Wi-Fi 6. Vilo’s latest release does, and, in theory, that means better coverage, faster speeds, and connectivity for more devices. Unfortunately, in practice, it was a different story. I found the system difficult to set up, performance proved inconsistent, and the network dropped altogether and required a reboot several times in the first three days.
Netgear Orbi RBK863 (3-Pack): As good as the Netgear Orbi 860 series is, the high price will repel most people, especially since it's a Wi-Fi 6 system. Opt for a three-pack, and the range is unsurpassed. It’s also very fast (though there’s no support for the 6-GHz band), and it proved rock solid during my testing, with zero glitches and no downtime. These routers are among the largest in the mesh market. You get a year of comprehensive security software, Netgear Armor, with your purchase, but it costs $100 annually after, and if you want parental controls, you’re looking at another $70 a year on top. It is a dependable Wi-Fi 6 system, but there’s no need to spend this much. Even with deep discounts, this is overpriced, and why buy it now when you can snag a good Wi-Fi 7 system for a similar price?
TP-Link Deco S4 (3-Pack): The Deco S4 is a dual-band system that offers pleasingly wide coverage and stable connectivity, but I recommend Wi-Fi 6 support as a minimum now, and this is a Wi-Fi 5 mesh. It is easy to set up and use, and each router has a pair of gigabit ports. The app offers basic parental controls and QoS, but it is distinctly bare-bones.
Wyze Mesh Router and Wyze Mesh Router Pro: More affordable mesh systems can only be a good thing, and the dual-band (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz) mesh router from budget security camera brand Wyze looks promising at first glance. Each router has two gigabit ports, covers up to 1,500 square feet, and can connect more than 50 devices. Setup was a breeze through the regular Wyze app. While it mostly worked well for day-to-day video streaming and online gaming, I found that speeds were inconsistent (with fluctuations of more than 100 Mbps). I also encountered a few complete drops. Features-wise, there is free security provided by Firedome, but not much else. The tri-band Wyze Mesh Router Pro adds Wi-Fi 6E support and performed far better, but failed to match some of our picks above. I also have concerns about security breaches at Wyze.
Linksys Velop Wi-Fi 6 (MX4200) (3-Pack): This mesh system was easy to install and generally offered solid coverage and speeds, but the performance was inconsistent. It did well at long range but fell way behind the Asus XT8 at close range. All three Velop units are routers with generous 3-gigabit LAN ports and a USB port, but they’re also big and chunky. There’s a good range of features and options, but the sparse mobile app was a little glitchy and slow, and you need a Linksys Shield subscription ($50 a year) to get the handy age-range filters for parental controls.
Mesh Wi-Fi Systems: Your Questions, Answered
What Is a Mesh Wi-Fi System?
A mesh Wi-Fi system consists of a main router that connects to your modem and one or more satellite nodes placed throughout your home. The entire system broadcasts a single network name (SSID) and password, automatically handing your devices off to whichever node provides the strongest signal as you move from room to room.
What Should I Consider When Shopping for a Mesh System?
Here are a few points to keep in mind when you are buying a new mesh Wi-Fi system.
Wi-Fi standards: Many devices support Wi-Fi 7 now. Many of the best laptops and phones do, and it’s only growing more common (the iPhone 16 and iPhone 17 range support it). All the models I recommend as main picks support at least Wi-Fi 6, and they are backward compatible with older Wi-Fi standards. If you have a lot of new devices, consider Wi-Fi 6E or Wi-Fi 7. Our router shopping guide goes into more depth.
Internet speeds: There are many ways to upgrade your Wi-Fi, but your internet speed is limited by your internet service provider (ISP). If the maximum speed of data coming to your modem is 100 Mbps, that’s the fastest possible connection that any router can provide.
Bands: The top speed that router manufacturers claim on the box is all of the bands added together, which is disingenuous since you usually only connect to one band at a time. MLO is a feature in Wi-Fi 7 that enables you connect on multiple bands simultaneously but you will still never achieve the top speeds that manufacturers state.
Coverage: While it’s good to have an idea of a router’s coverage and speed, understand that your mileage may vary. The construction materials in your house, your neighbors’ proximity and Wi-Fi networks, the devices you have with wireless connectivity, and the position of routers and nodes in your home are just some of the factors that can impact the performance of your Wi-Fi.
Backhaul: Backhaul channels are reserved for one mesh router or node to talk to another. It’s common for mesh routers to have a dedicated backhaul channel, enabling the main router to provide speeds as close to your full internet speed as possible to any node. This is also important for local network speed and may impact the performance of network-attached storage (NAS) systems, remote console play, and how quickly you can copy a file from one wireless device on your network to another.
QoS: Quality of Service allows you to prioritize the Wi-Fi connection for specific activities and their related apps or for specific devices. You can use it to ensure gaming, streaming, or video calls take precedence, which can be very handy in any household with limited bandwidth.
Ports: Ports and cables can help establish more stable connections. They may be essential if you have smart home hubs for lights and security cameras or network-attached storage that needs to plug into your main router. But they can also be useful on nodes to plug in streaming devices or game consoles and get the full benefit of any dedicated backhaul channel speeds your chosen system might offer.
Mesh vs. router: Although mesh systems are tempting, many homes will be better served by a single, well-placed Wi-Fi router. Check out the Best Wi-Fi Routers for options. Some of the routers I tested in the modern two-floor 1,600-square-foot home I used to live in performed just as well or better than mesh systems, but the old Victorian house I live in now, although not much bigger, has very thick walls and really needs a mesh.
Security: Most routers come with optional subscriptions for security, parental controls, and sometimes other extras like VPN service. You don't need these subscriptions, but they can be handy and provide peace of mind. Just make sure you factor in the cost or opt for a system from a manufacturer like Asus, which offers them for free.
Wait for sales: Mesh systems tend to be very expensive when first released and are often buggy. By waiting a few months, you can expect deep discounts (50 percent is not unusual) and firmware updates that ensure more stable performance.
What Are the Benefits of a Mesh System?
Easy setup is part of the appeal of mesh Wi-Fi systems, and they generally have a companion app that should guide you through the process. Mesh systems are designed to automatically manage your network, deciding on the correct bands and Wi-Fi channels for different devices to ensure a speedy and stable connection.
Mobile apps generally make it easy to check on connected devices and tweak basic settings when needed. They often offer parental controls, network security, guest network, and device or activity prioritization features, but sometimes these require a paid subscription. Mesh systems are also expandable, so you can add more nodes should you need to. Many mesh manufacturers, such as Eero, enable you to mix and match mesh systems from different ranges.
What Are the Disadvantages of a Mesh System?
The main downside to mesh systems is price, as they're generally more expensive than single routers. You may find speeds from nodes are significantly reduced compared to the main router if you rely on wireless backhaul. Mesh systems are not suitable for every home and can often be outperformed by a good, well-placed single router. Each node also requires a good spot within range of the main router with an outlet. I break this down further in mesh system vs. Wi-Fi router.
Is Mesh Router Location Important?
Poor placement of nodes is the main mistake people make with a mesh system. Nodes must be within range of the main router and need a strong signal. Think of a mesh system as the Wi-Fi backbone of your home, and avoid placing nodes at the extremities. It’s also crucial not to place nodes next to potential obstructions (metal, furniture, mirrors) or hide them away in cabinets. Avoid potential interference from other electronics like microwaves, baby monitors, and TVs. While people often place nodes too far away from the main router, placing them too close together can also reduce their effectiveness.
Are Mesh Systems Better Than Wi-Fi Extenders?
Mesh systems are superior to even the best Wi-Fi extenders for most folks seeking whole home coverage. Wi-Fi extenders take the Wi-Fi signal from your router and use the same frequency band to repeat the signal. You can expect slower speeds (50 percent of your main router speed is the maximum, but it’s usually much lower), higher latency, and smart home issues. They also tend to plug directly into outlets, making it tough to position them well. Cheap extenders don’t work well, and good ones are so expensive that you are better served by upgrading your router or buying a mesh system. The one case where it may be worth buying an extender is when you have a single trouble spot in your home.
Should I Choose a Wi-Fi 6 or a Wi-Fi 7 Mesh?
While Wi-Fi 6 is enough for most homes for now, Wi-Fi 7 brings potential improvements in bandwidth and speed, among other things, though you can expect coverage to be similar. Most Wi-Fi 7 mesh systems are still more expensive. There are some cheaper dual-band Wi-Fi 7 systems, but they miss out on the 6-GHz band, simply offering the 2.4-GHz and 5-GHz bands we are used to. Unless you are connecting your mesh routers with Ethernet cables to create a wired backhaul, a dual-band Wi-Fi 7 system will likely perform worse than a similarly priced tri-band Wi-Fi 6 mesh (with two 5-GHz bands and one 2.4 GHz) in most homes, because it has to use the available bands for wireless backhaul (traffic between the router and nodes). If you want to try the 6-GHz band, Wi-Fi 6E mesh systems offer a more affordable way to do so.
All that said, if you have a very busy household with a lot of devices or want to be future-proof and don’t mind paying for it, a tri- or quad-band Wi-Fi 7 mesh is the way to go. If you currently have issues with latency or bandwidth, or you simply want the latest features, such as MLO enabling devices to connect on multiple bands, Wi-Fi 7 is worthwhile.
Can I Add Mesh Wi-Fi to an Existing Router?
You can add a mesh system to your existing router, but it’s not always the best idea. Ideally, you will have a separate modem that you can plug your mesh directly into, and you can remove your old router. If you have a combined router and modem supplied by your Internet Service Provider (ISP), you may need to plug your mesh system into that, but you should set your ISP’s router into bridge mode. Ensure you check compatibility, as some mesh systems have limitations when used this way.
Some manufacturers also offer single routers that have mesh support, so you can add mesh systems or additional routers to create a mesh. These are usually proprietary, such as AiMesh from Asus, so you can only mix routers from that manufacturer. There is an open standard called EasyMesh, but only TP-Link offers wide support across its range. If you decide to mix and match, it’s best to pick devices that support the same Wi-Fi standard with broadly similar specs.
What About the US Ban on Foreign-Made Routers?
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has banned new consumer internet routers manufactured outside the US because of national security concerns. The ban doesn’t affect any routers already in American homes or currently on sale in the US, but all new routers aimed at the consumer market must be approved.
The way the ban is described, it will likely apply to every new mesh system, because there are currently no companies manufacturing routers or the components they are assembled from in the US (except maybe some Starlink Wi-Fi routers). But companies can apply for exemptions.
All new models of foreign-produced routers will require Conditional Approval from the Department of Defense and the Department of Homeland Security before the FCC can clear them for sale in the US. Read Everything You Need to Know About the Foreign-Made Router Ban in the US to learn more.
What About Firmware and Security Updates?
While the FCC initially published a waiver covering software and firmware updates until March 1, 2027, it has now extended that waiver “at least until January 1, 2029.”
What happens after that date is not clear, but if the FCC were to block further updates for the routers and mesh systems folks already own, it would exacerbate the very issue it is trying to address. The majority of routers that are compromised and used in cyberattacks are usually older devices that no longer receive security updates.
Should I Buy a Mesh Now?
This is tricky. If you live in the US and need a router or a mesh, you should maybe still buy one, but I wouldn’t blame you for waiting to see how this pans out. All the major manufacturers I asked who responded or have released a statement, including Asus, TP-Link, and Synology, are confident about getting exemptions, but whether they will is impossible to say for sure. So far, only Netgear, Adtran, and Eero have been granted a Conditional Approval, and an FCC spokesperson told me, “We expect approvals to be granted in a timely manner.”
How We Test Mesh Routers
To test the best Wi-Fi mesh systems, I use each one for at least a week (usually longer) in a busy family home of four with lots of video streaming, gaming, and video calls. I also test the mobile apps and web interfaces to see how easy it is to change settings, set up parental controls, and access security features. My priority is to learn how well the mesh works in real-life rather than a lab, but I do also run a set of standardized tests, so that I have numbers to compare.
I run speed tests (downloads and uploads). I transfer files on the network on multiple devices (including iPhones, Android phones, Windows PCs, and MacBooks) from different spots around my home, including files from devices connected to the main router to devices connected to nodes. I use NetSpot to survey signal strength throughout the house and create heat maps for comparison. I run the TamoSoft Throughput Test, and I turn the power and modem off and on to find out how each system recovers.
How Did WIRED Select Products to be Reviewed?
I try to test as many mesh releases as possible and have put more than 40 systems through their paces. (A handful of those have since been discontinued, but most are reviewed on this page.) It’s not possible to test every device, so while I will typically test flagship systems, I also strive to find more affordable systems and identify models that will suit the average family home in terms of budget and performance.
We are brand agnostic, so we will test systems from any manufacturer, provided we can get ahold of them. The manufacturers or their PR companies provide all the mesh systems we test. We do lean toward testing more systems from the most popular brands. I would love to test one of Ubiquiti’s mesh systems but have been unable to secure one so far.
Most products are loaned for a month or so and then returned. A handful of our recommended picks are kept for longer-term testing. The remainder are donated to charities. I recently dropped off a batch to Reusing IT and have donated several devices to Oxfam and Shelter.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.