Apple's iOS 27, unveiled at WWDC 2026, will be coming to iPhone models as old as the iPhone 11 series that launched in 2019. While eight years of software support is unprecedented, it's also potentially more necessary than ever.
Even though the iPhone 11 is unlikely to support any of the newer Apple Intelligence-related features, the additional year of fresh software support comes amid two important moments in the tech industry.
The most obvious has been the overall increased cost of electronics, attributed to factors like the ongoing RAM shortage and concerns over rising tariffs over the past few years. We've seen several phone companies push phone prices up by as much as $200 between their 2025 and 2026 models -- in some cases, phone prices have even increased after their initial release.
But perhaps less publicized is the second-hand market, where older iPhone models remain easy to obtain. The iPhone 11 with 256GB of space costs $209 as of this writing on Amazon. In a recent CNET poll surveying 2,600 adults, over 48% said they have considered purchasing a refurbished device, citing cost-effectiveness and the high cost of new electronics as the primary motivators.
Both factors point to a trend that people are aiming to keep their phones longer than ever and are willing to make use of devices that aren't the latest and greatest but are perfectly capable of their overall needs. I've contacted Apple asking about how many iPhone 11 users are out there (an answer I'm not expecting to get), but there's other evidence that people are using older iPhones and can use the additional software support.
Apple has reasons to take care of customers on older iPhones
Apple's iPhone line typically tops the lists for bestselling smartphones around the world, and as such, it's not too surprising to hear that Apple's also one of the biggest sellers of refurbished phones. According to an October 2025 report from analytics firm Counterpoint Research, the iPhone 12, iPhone 13 and iPhone 14 all drove refurbished sales growth in Africa, India and Southeast Asia.
In markets more like the US, the refurbished market had flatter growth between 2024 and 2025, with the report citing longer replacement cycles and rising costs driving customers to delay upgrading.
With fewer people upgrading, Apple may be taking a closer look at ensuring customers who are still using older devices aren't left in a lurch with devices that are harder to use. In January of this year, iPhone models running iOS 12 and later received a small update that helped ensure that iMessage and FaceTime would still function on models as old as the iPhone 5S from 2013. And even when Apple does sunset iOS updates for an iPhone, the company historically provides several additional years of security updates.
Supporting older iPhone models can help stem people from moving to Android
As phone prices increase, Apple's ongoing support of older iPhone models could be a defensive strategy. While Samsung, Motorola and Google have a plethora of new Android phones that sell for under $500, Apple's entry-level price for a new phone is now $600 (the iPhone 17E released earlier this year).
Making 2019's iPhone 11 feel a little fresher with iOS 27 provides an additional reason for an iPhone user to stick around in Apple's ecosystem without needing to consider a switch to Android where they might get a phone with a bigger battery or newer camera for less money than a new iPhone.
Giving reasons to stay on an iPhone is more important since Apple's also being driven (largely by the European Union) to support more open technologies that put the iPhone and Android phones on a more level playing field. This includes RCS text messaging that makes many iMessage-like features work across iPhone and Android, and eSIM features that make it easier to transfer your phone number from an iPhone to Android.
Apple providing a currently industry-leading eight years of support to its iPhone 11 is a small feather in its cap that can be touted to one-up Android until similar commitments are made by companies like Samsung, Google and Motorola.