Weâre joining forces with Accenture, Bain & Company, BCG, Deloitte, and McKinsey to bring the power of frontier AI to organizations around the world.
Artificial intelligence (AI) could contribute up to $15.7 trillion to the global economy by 2030, yet many businesses face a significant adoption gap. To date, only 25% of organizations have successfully moved AI into production at scale.
At Google DeepMind, we believe AI is one of the most transformative technologies of our time, capable of delivering new products and services, and scientific breakthroughs that improve the lives of billions of people. To help businesses harness this potential responsibly, weâre partnering with Accenture, Bain & Company, BCG, Deloitte, and McKinsey to accelerate AI-driven transformation and help industries adopt frontier technology at scale. By combining our advanced research with their strategic expertise, we aim to solve complex challenges across sectors and drive global economic growth.
A new initiative for enterprise transformation
Weâre partnering with global enterprise consultancies to help them deliver world-leading agentic transformation for customers at speed and scale. Together weâll use AI to drive meaningful human impact, empowering workforces with AI tools that provide real-time data for better decision-making and management of complex tasks.
From research labs to real-world impact
This collaboration allows our partners to work directly with Google DeepMindâs world-leading technical talent. Together, we will focus on critical enterprise needs in sectors like finance, manufacturing, retail, media and entertainment.
These partnerships include three key pillars:
- Enabling scaled, industry-specific AI capabilities: We will collaborate on challenging customer use cases, supporting the development of scaled, industry-specific AI solutions.
- Early access to frontier models: Partners will receive early access to our frontier models, including the Gemini family. Their feedback on these will help us further refine these systems to ensure theyâre equipped to deliver benefits for customers.
- Access to AI leadership: We will connect our leadership with customer CEOs and boards, helping them navigate the future of frontier AI research and development.
Looking ahead
These efforts build upon Google Cloudâs work supporting global consulting partners, systems integrators, software partners, and specialized services providers as they implement and scale agentic AI.
In the coming years, AI has the potential to solve critical global challenges and amplify human potential. To secure these benefits, AI must be diffused responsibly across industries, remaining guided by human expertise. We are excited to see what we can build and scale together with the worldâs leading strategic partners in pursuit of these goals.