Founder Services Services for Startups
Founders of New Ventures must necessarily keep a laser-like focus on perfecting the product and making sales. So often I have come across entrepreneurs who think that they must hire professional services for the tasks that they don’t know how to do—at a high cost. Or, that they have to hire their own specialists before they have the cash flow confidence to afford such people.
Hiring specialists too early can be a mistake, given the impact on cash flow and making decisions about the way to organize management processes and procedures.
The Web is a very good way to go for founder services, certainly at the beginning. Happily there are many great founder services available, not only independent contractors, but of greater significance, software-based services.
Here you will find some of the essential functions of business that you can take on at fixed prices. Many of them have cut-down versions available for free, or free trials. This means that you don’t have to jump into unknown territory with a heavy commitment up front. Many founder services also have different service levels to choose from.
The areas of founder services that follow are the ones I suspect you’ll most need at the outset. The list may grow or decrease as the effectiveness of each service changes. I mention those founder services that I have used personally and found to be very good. Indeed, I only add firms that I have used, or others that I have checked very carefully before listing them.
Here are the 10 categories of service that I think you are most likely to need in the early days.
- Bookkeeping
- Community Capital Markets
- Equity Capital
- Freelance Services
- HR Administration and Payroll
- Legal
- Loan Finance
- Marketing & CRM
- Remote Working
Of course you may grow out of them with increased revenue, or decisions to devolve responsibility and hire managers and functional specialists. Please feel free to email me about any of these founder services, or give me feedback with your experience.
Traditional humor about startup bookkeeping involves the shoe box into which you dump all your receipts. Accountancy is one of the founders services which often challenge decision making for startups. In my experience, there are three aspects of accounting in which founders need to be highly capable. None are about keeping the books.
Many founders I have met think that one of the first professionals that they need to visit when they embark on a startup is an accountant. Except in very special cases, I believe that is an expensive mistake. Not because the services they provide are not good, but it’s rare that the complexities at the startup stage require their services. On the other hand, if the founder herself does not have a good grasp of big picture financials, then she is headed for failure.
The technicalities of bookkeeping can be acquired through software, but the critical aspects of company finance are more strategic and managerial. In other words to do with the founder’s reason for starting and staying in business. Hence, being able to steer the fortunes of the startup. That relies on up-to-date and accurate bookkeeping data, of course.
The Strategic and Material Aspects of Numbers
These are three things:
- Forecasting, which the founder should have learned about in the process of establishing and planning the business in the first place;
- Measuring Progress against targets and revising priorities if necessary, and maybe for changing future forecasts in the light of actuals—or even pivoting the business;
- Revising Time Allocation and priorities to improve the likelihood of business success, in the light of financial results. Too often founders make the mistake of putting ‘good money after bad’, when things don’t turn out as forecast.
As you’d discover from my eBook, Founders Stay Afloat: By Tracking 25 Vital Facts and Figures. it is really vital to know what numbers to track. If you don’t have the numbers, then you can’t track them. Quite a few of the numbers are buried in the bookkeeping, and some are not even in the books.
So what I am implying is that, though bookkeeping is essential, it does not need a professional accountant, and an external accountant won’t be much good at doing the three activities above; that’s your job! In the early days, you probably don’t even need a bookkeeper, which is why I suggest you use bookeeping software like Intuit QuickBooks. They have four plans for small business: a bare-bones free plan, Simple Plan at $19.00 a month, Plus at $57.50 and Advanced at $137.50. They are market leaders and if you are daunted, you can access an Intuit ProAdvisor Accountant. They have several competitors, both free and paid.
Many startups begin with a local focus, even if they are using the Web. Though they live locally, they may not think of all the founder services and support that operate in their local market economy. First of all, if founders in the local community are looking for capital, they tend to look no further than the bank on Main Street.
The advantage in working within the local community, even if the founder is also using the Internet, is the not only financial benefit, but also the networking that can result. There are some 37 million small-town and rural Americans who consider they have the capabilities to start a business1, but about half of them don’t know where to begin and nearly half (42 per cent) of small business owners surveyed admit they had limited or no financial literacy before starting their businesses. One of the founder services that is most critical to a successful take off, is the availability of suitable sources of finance.
Cutting Edge Capital is a great source of community funding for startups and early-stage businesses, not necessarily in their locality, but definitely in yours. The people at Cutting Edge are not financiers themselves, but work with you to obtain funding by a variety of means. As a strategic practice of their law firm, Cutting Edge Counsel, helps, mission-driven organizations to raise capital in alignment with their values and goals. Among founders services that startups need, money and its management is one of the most vexing.
Cutting Edge Offer Funding Help in the Community
Unless you are seeking to be the next quick high growth ‘gazelle’ startup, you may do well to avoid wasting your time trying to find an angel or a venture capitalist to back you. Much better to ‘go local’. There are many alternative ways to raise equity. Here are six examples with which Cutting Edge can help.
- Direct Public Offerings
- Community Investment Funds
- Regulation A Offerings
- Program-Related Investments
- Private Placements
- Regulation Crowdfunding
If you click any of the links above, it will take you related information on Cutting Edge Capital’s website.
You may perhaps heard of Crowdfunding (though equity crowdfunding is a special kind), but the other forms of funding you are less likely to know about. If you do make contact with Cutting Edge, please do tell them that Will Keyser of Venture Founders suggested it. If you want more information about equity crowdfunding, visit my Directory of Equity Crowdfunding.
Community Equity Crowdfunding
An even better idea might be to use your existing community/network and raise your equity using Wefunder, the best people to help you. As a bonus, if you are ready to start fundraising, you can get 10% off Wefunder fees, if you visit Wefunder with this link and work with them as a consequence. The great thing about working with Wefunder is that they have a community of investors you can tap in to, thus enlarging your existing network. As a consequence you will have a greater potential pool of investors. Of course, it’s not a done-deal, you will have to work hard to build your pitch, though naturally Wefunder can help there too. If you want to know a bit more about Wefunder, just scroll down to the next section—on Equity Capital, but be assured it is one of the most valuable of founder services.
In addition, if you are a strongly purpose driven new venture, you may find help at of the 85 firms that I list in my Directory of Mission Driven Capital.
1 This is based on 2010 Census data showing that 19.3% of the US population is based in small-towns and rural areas, having 67+ million adults aged between 18-64, combined with data from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2013 United States Report showing that 56 per cent of adults believe that they have the capabilities to start a business.
2 According to Intuit Quickbooks.
Raising equity capital is a complex business. The first question is whether the business needs external equity investment, that is, hard cash to buy a stake in the company, as opposed to, say, two co-founders deciding how to split the nominal value of the equity between them.
Chances are high that if the startup does not need large capital investment in tangible assets, or massive investment to gain market access in a new field, outside investors may not be needed. Hence, the founders may not seek outside investment. If the startup has need of large sums to conduct research unlikely to result in revenue for a long time, on the other hand, they may be forced to attract investment before any returns can be created.
At the other end of the scale, a startup consulting company (selling what we used to call ‘vaporware’) may not require any funding beyond the founder’s savings or a bit of loan finance. In between, there are many startups that need funds prior to really getting going. In those cases, big venture capitalists are seldom attracted. Even business angels may turn away.
Nonetheless, from personal experience, I know that the early stages of the business are still cash hungry, and cannot rely on positive cash flow alone. Investment in those ‘middle ground’ startups, especially those that have a strong purpose for being, may find the market unexcited about investing risk capital, or lending much. There are many ways to seek founder services in the funding field. Take every opportunity to seek guidance from trusted advisers rather than just making assumptions.
Equity crowdfunding is new, since the implementation of Obama’s JOBS Act, by the SEC in 2016. This opened up the market for non-accredited individuals (we ordinary mortals) to invest directly in startups, and for startups to seek equity investment in their new ventures. A number of platforms were established. Among them is Wefunder, the best.
Wefunder has many attractions for startups with purpose, because they themselves were a startup with purpose when they were set up in 2016 and they still are.
Wefunder is a Benefit Corporation, for starters. A Benefit Corporation is a type of for-profit corporate entity, authorized by 35 US states and the DC that includes positive impact on society, workers, the community and the environment in addition to profit as its legally defined goals, in that the definition of “best interest of the corporation” is specified to include those impacts.
Wefunder is also a B Corporation. Certified B Corporations are a new kind of business that balances purpose and profit. They are legally required to consider the impact of their decisions on their workers, customers, suppliers, community, and the environment. Wefunder achieved B Corp Certification in late 2016, after they completed the B Impact Assessment. This is one good reason why Wefunder is Equity Crowdfunding for Purposeful Startups.
The B Economy is built by everyone who works for, buys from, invests in, learns or teaches about, or supports businesses striving to create a shared and durable prosperity for all.
There are many jobs that require expertise and time that startups simply do not have, so using founder services is often the way to go. Finding support and services that can be turned on and off is often daunting. Of course, software that comes with your computer operating system often comes to the rescue, but if you lack the necessary skills that can be frustrating.
Of course you can find independent contractors in your local community or get referrals from people you trust. I have encountered many freelancers who have then become attracted to a buyer and then become a full time employee. In fact, that’s not a bad way to recruit—try before you buy!
Fiverr is a freelance platform for creative and professional services. I have used relatively frequently, and especially where I have an irritating small problem to solve. What is really great about Fiverr is you can turn on and off the service like a tap.
Originally all jobs were priced at a basic five dollars (hence the name), and indeed some still are. However as the Fiverr service has grown and become more sophisticated, a search for someone to do a job will show you a range of prices for a range of work at different prices depending upon complexity or scale.
You can find a huge range of founder services on offer at Fiverr. They cover graphics & design, digital & social marketing, programming & technology, writing & translation, office administration & virtual assistance. In any event you can search their site for anything with which you need help.
Example Job: Writing an eBook
I have written a couple of eBooks, based on my own entrepreneurial experience and used a designer to create both covers—I don’t have the talent for that. However, I could have chosen to find an eBook writer using Fiverr, since the most valuable part of any eBook is the content. If you consider yourself a poor writer, or don’t have the time to spare, talented Fiver-sourced writers could structure your content, tell your brand’s story, and engage your readers from start to finish.
Likewise you could find an editor and proofreader through Fiverr. Then you might need an eBook designer to improve the readability and appeal of the text. What good is your eBook if no one will read it? To drive more traffic to your ebook with search engine marketing, social media, influencer or other kinds of marketing, Fiverr could be at your service.
Fiverr itself was a startup—in 2010 and went public via an IPO in 2019. The company is adding new freelance talent all the time, so your choice is huge and you can select the location of your freelancer. The great thing is that you’ll know how much expenditure you are committed to at the outset. Since Fiverr is the intermediary, you know that their freelancers have been vetted and rated.
Obviously when you are in the ‘solopreneur’ stage you don’t need to think about pay and benefits systems as one of the founder services that you’ll need.. The moment you take on new staff members, you are going to have to decide how to do people admin and development. Even with my first startup in the dim and distant 1980s, it was a bit of a headache. Luckily if you are starting a business today, there’s plenty of help from founder services, without the necessity of hiring an HR person.
As soon as you decide you need to recruit, it’s worth having a checklist of the jobs that will be necessary, even though it’s too early to hire an HR specialist:
-
strategy and policies: the new purpose driven venture will be very conscious of why it exists, but it needs to establish the conditions of how it intends to operate;
-
recruitment and onboarding: criteria for recruitment now and at the early stages; how do we make sure that new recruits are best set up for success;
-
competency: you need to think about the skills your staff need as the business develops—planning will help extend purpose and grow performance;
-
compensation and benefits: not only a matter of thinking about market pay rates and scales; but policy, like are you going to set a pay ratio top to bottom, what about retirement and healthcare;
-
payroll management: not only is this quite difficult for someone without experience to manage, but nowadays the rules and regulations are complex;
-
employee relations; how you going to ensure that your startup’s purpose is lived daily at work; you’ll need a smooth payroll and employee administration;
-
compliance, health & safety: oh goodness do you really have to think about this? Yes, for positive reasons, not just sticking to the law;
-
training, development and performance management: it’s not only good social responsibility, but investing in your staff makes a huge difference to the startup’s behavior and performance as it grows.
Online SaaS and consulting are widely available, but it’s vital to both select the best in the business, but also people who are not going to expect you to buy all the ‘bells and whistles’ at the outset. Above all you must select those whose values reflect your own.
TriNet provides startups with full-service HR solutions, so you get time back to focus on your business, your employees get HR support and your business gains the HR guidance it needs. The company provides an all-in-one HR platform that includes: HR expertise; payroll services; access to big company benefits; risk mitigation and compliance advice—both within and outside the US.
I used to recommend a firm called Zenefits, who were purchased by TirNet some years ago. I recommend that you work with them, or another of the many very good HR platforms that now exist, as you start recruiting your first person. They will save you early stage headaches and their services can grow as your venture grows and takes on more people, both before and after you feel impelled to hire your own HR person. To that end, TriNet offers plans from $8 a month per employee.
I do remember an exception from my own experience, however. On the second day of my startup‘s existence, we received a ‘cease and desist’ letter telling us we had to stop using our company name immediately, since it infringed another company’s trade mark and registered name. I knew it was a ‘come on’, since their name was not the same and they were in a sector entirely different from ours. But I did not know how to reply. One quick call to an attorney, got me the answer, for free actually, and that was the attorney I did use later in the life of the business.
Why do I say this? Several reasons:
- What formal legal structure should the startup have. People around you and those from whom you seek informal advice can help, but I’d always start with your State’s Secretary of State office for corporations. I have found State officials to be keen and able to help. The price of their advice is zero. Each State has slightly different legal structures available to meet your needs. A good place to start is to visit my page of Business Entity Types. On the other hand, Legal Zoom can help with do-it-yourself questionnaires. Either way you will have the State Filing Fees in addition.
- If you are going to be hiring staff early, I think you’d be better with a people specialist, so I’d say use Zenefits. Or I would look for a mentor, especially one who has recently been through the process of getting new hires. Be cautious and see how much of the task can be done through outsourcing, using specialists who already know the law, but focus on ensuring that you organizational structure is good and that you have made good strategy and HR choices. Your HR practices, procedures and documentation need to match your style.
- Attorneys are necessarily super cautious, because their job is to provide you with legal protection. They may advise that before having any external negotiations, say with finance sources, you need to establish NDAs (non-disclosure agreements). On the other hand, in the angel or venture capital world, you’ll find that most of the leaders will not sign such documents, knowing that if you are worth investment, you are the only one who can make your ideas or IP (intellectual property) convert into a viable business. There are exceptions, for instance, when hi-tech or science is involved, when you’ll need to protect IP from fraud and help from an attorney is probably called for.
- If you are seeking external finance, other than straightforward bank finance, you will need to prepare yourself from a legal standpoint. For example, do not even get money from family & friends without sealing the deal with a ‘promissory note’, a legal form of agreement (see my page on Loans from Family and Friends). Otherwise, relationships are at risk. External sources of equity (as opposed to loan) finance will get you involved in ‘term sheet to define the terms of the capital investment. They are non-binding, but do set out things like valuation and voting rights, eventual liquidation or transfer and length of the investor’s commitment. You can get forms for term sheets online, for example from Legal Zoom. When the deal is formalized, then an attorney will be necessary.
For the basics, to get your startup going, I recommend you use LegalZoom, They make navigating legal processes easier, whether you want to use their guided tools or choose an attorney to help you. I think that one of the best values of using LegalZoom is to ‘survey the legal scene’ as it may impact your new venture, and to make sure that you are not making foolish mistakes by not taking care of something legal ahead of time. Just spend some time browsing their site, to build up a picture of their wide range of founder services. You can get a really good picture of what business structure to utilize—including for nonprofit, as well as for-profit business organization structures.
They offer not only advice on many topics, but also many forms and agreements, many templates that you can use. These cover a wide range from business formation, to patents, trademarks and the many requirements for registering for tax. To save you a huge amount of time, even before you start, they have a way of checking whether you can even register the business name that you’ve chosen for your venture.
You can get legal advice from LegalZoom through a Business Advisory Plan for a flat fee (a few hundred dollars a year), with an unlimited number of 30-minute consultations. If it appears that you need greater assistance, they have a directory of attorneys in every State. This offers a great advantage, in that the attorneys listed have been checked out by Legal Zoom. The directory is set out in a simple, informative, but comprehensive way so that choosing an attorney is made easy.
Nolo has thousands of do-it-yourself products, including legal forms, online documents, books and eBooks, and software. From them you can get all the most common business forms you’ll need to operate your business. I did. They will save you a ton of money by avoiding paying big bucks for common procedures that are pretty standard. If you are anxious about some legal nicety, you can always use a downloaded form and just have it reviewed by an attorney.
You’ll find a great deal more help than just the forms, books and software, though. For instance, Nolo has an extensive library of legal articles—all for free. The law can be hard to find, complex, and intimidating. Nolo makes it accessible to everyone—to help people find answers to their everyday business legal questions, through their Legal Encyclopedia. There is even a basic book on the legal aspects of small business startup. The book might be an excellent tiny investment as you are in the process of planning your (ad)venture.
Most small startups that feel the need to have a loan go straight to the founder’s bank. There are plenty of other offers out there, but a little caution is needed before signing a loan agreement that might later strangle you. You can go for a personal loan, but unless you are onto a sure winner, I would try to avoid personal loans, since if the business fails, you’ll still have the loan around your neck.
A business loan will be forthcoming from the bank only if you have got a year or two of business accounts to show—or as would be unlikely, some business asset to offer as collateral. Some banks will require a FICO credit score that satisfies them about your ability to repay. My advice is that you can risk the company, but you should avoid personal liabilities and run away from any demands for a personal guarantee.
I suggest you might find it helpful to start by looking at my guide to sources of startup finance. The two most common kinds of small business loans are term loans for a fixed period, or lines of credit that you can tap into if, for example, you have a poor sales month, or too many late payers.
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers loan guarantees, for both financing fixed assets and for working capital, under the 7(a) scheme. They even have something called Lender Match, where they will find you a lender in the 7(a) scheme—within two days. The SBA also have micro-loans, and disaster loans when designated in particular locations. These follow disasters like hurricanes, or the Coronavirus. Starting with the SBA makes good sense, since they can offer impartial and sound advice, even find you an appropriate counseling organization near you. A special advantage in working with them is that they can be a great help with a (maybe) unexpected revenue source from Federal Government contracts.
However, the best means of raising the operating finance is without doubt to use revenue from sales. I know in my startup back in 1982 (!), that was the most important means of maintaining a positive cash flow. Largely this is because the interest rate was nil. Of course if you don’t already have the cash and you have significant funds of your own, then you will have to have recourse to borrowing.
You’ll find less conventional help with finance in my page on Sweat Equity and more on Bootstrap Startup Finance.
There is no startup without revenue. There is unlikely to be revenue without some marketing. With limited funds, you will need all the help you can get. Here you’ll find founder services that can make your marketing and sales efforts a whole lot easier.
Logos: There are plenty of free services designing your logo such as free software or free logo makers that you’ll find on the web. You can get a free logo design at Constant Contact. In my view, it is much more important to decide what message you want to give through the logo.
In my own case I wanted Venture Founders to come across as a source of wisdom on entrepreneurship. So naturally I chose an owl. I also had an emotional reason to do so. My great grandfather founded a bank in 1868 and his corporate logo was an owl. That only matters to me, but provides me with a sense of continuity.
However, since as you’ll see if you search ‘owl logo’, there are gazillions of such logos available or in use: just picture Trip Advisor’s! so I now tend to use my logo with the tie line words ‘Startup with Purpose’ to convey some specific meaning.
Business Cards, Flyers, Brochures: They are simple to produce on your desk top, or by using many different online printers. Equally you can use the UPS Store, Staples or their competitors. Specialists, like Vistaprint can also do a good job pretty cheaply and effectively. In each case, however, answering the question WHY? is vital. Why do you want to make such a document. Your answers will guide how you want to approach the job.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is something I learned about very early into my first startup, but struggled with it, back in the 1980s. Bits of paper, phone messages, to-do lists, emailing. However in today’s world we have software-based CRM. This simplifies the process of managing your sales funnel from identification of prospects through to initial and repeat sales. There are many SaaS offers out there, but I suggest that you use Zoho CRM. You may have already decided to use Zoho for other parts of your marketing and sales process. If you have, then the process can be streamlined. If you have not, you should consider doing so.
I mention SaaS, so here’s a brief introduction. Software as a service (SaaS) is where customers access software over the Internet. The service provider hosts the application at its data center and customers accesses it remotely through their web browser. SaaS is mostly available on a subscription basis, rather than purchase.
The model is particularly valuable for small and medium-sized businesses. Generally speaking, since the software is based on the supplier’s server, the client does not have the occasionally troublesome job of updating it.
SaaS has several advantages, not least cost. The other advantages include time and energy; not being obliged to hire IT professionals, while the company remains modest in size.
Zoho CRM covers every step of the Sales Funnel, and makes tracking your marketing and sales process both simple and effective. Zoho CRM has a simple, straightforward user interface with a minimal learning curve. You can change the plan you buy as your business develops. Zoho CRM covers the management of leads, contacts, deals, email, as well as sales automation, reporting & analytics, and marketing automation. At least take a look at their range of founder services early on your startup journey, to avoid costly mistakes.
Deployment, consultation, onboarding, and training programs are available from Zoho to help you get started smoothly. So often, I have downloaded a piece of SaaS on a free or trial basis and given up, when it took me too much time to master the software, since like so many founders, I’m no techie. If you have started your CRM system with other software of spreadsheets, there’s a ‘migration wizard’ that will help you get data into the Zoho tool.
The real benefit of Zoho CRM is that it enables you to close more deals in a faster time. The intangible benefit is that the CRM will enable you to have a huge data base to interrogate and produce reports. The reports will enable you to determine what marketing and sales actions are the most effective. Thereby you’ll be able to gain valuable insights and optimize your marketing. Zoho has many other services in sales and marketing functions.
Constant Contact for Email Campaigns and More
Email always seems like a daunting task. Creating compelling copy and interesting graphics is hard without help. Keeping records of email addresses and mailings, too. That’s where Constant Contact is so good—and easy to use. Though I’m not currently using them, I did use them a lot four or five years ago. It really helped my then business and the more I used it and built my email list, the better it got. I knew I could always be in touch with the Constant Contact team and get help.
The great thing is that they are really established, having started in the business back in 1995. The founders of Constant Contact envisioned an online marketing tool that would help small businesses, nonprofits, and individuals reach a wider audience without breaking their marketing budget. Basically they still do that, but they have widened the offer, and can even make a simple website for you.
Constant Contact was acquired by Endurance International Group a while ago, but their original aspirations remain: to serve the world of small business, hence they are used to people seeking founder services in a crowded market. The Group has the intention of working closely with the community where they operate, by supporting and working with local organizations, because they believe thriving businesses are built on thriving communities. Their main base is in and around Boston, MA, but they operate overseas as well—in South America and Europe.
Constant Contact has marketing advisors whom you can contact direct for consultation by phone. By the way, they also have a very effective logo building system, too.
123RF for Images and Vectors
Why should images be important for marketing a startup? You will find the moment you want to prepare a brochure, build a website, run a blog or use any medium, you will be in need of images to enhance the written word. The longer I have been in business, the more I have wanted to illustrate my messages.
However, being neither a good photographer nor illustrator, I have had recourse to the web. My selection here is for 123RF, a 100% bootstrapped company since 2005. They have grown to be one of the world’s largest digital stock agencies. 123RF has helped a wide clientele of individuals and businesses tell their stories using creative imagery, sounds and motion contributed by talents from around the world. A subscription costs $24.50 a month that gives you unlimited content.
There are also many free sources for images. Some of the best, including those I use, are: Pexels, Unsplash, Pixabay, Stock Cake, Vecteezy.
If you search, you’ll find many very helpful services, like Praised that is a free testimonial collection and display tool. Founders share a link with customers, collect text and video testimonials, approve them with one click, and embed a widget on any website. Free tier available, no credit card required.
According to Global Workplace Analytics, 5 million employees (3.6% of the workforce) currently work-at-home half-time or more and regular work-at-home has grown 173% since 2005, 11% faster than the rest of the workforce (which grew 15%) and nearly 47 times faster than the self-employed population, which grew by 4%.
At crisis times, as with the COVID-19 virus, that number vastly increases. In any event, the proportion of people working from home or other remote locations is increasing. In parallel, the software to support them is increasing both in volume and sophistication. In my last year of MBA teaching 5 years ago, I taught some of my classes remotely. I found the experience frustrating from the technical and interpersonal point of view, but it worked. I used a combination of Google Hangouts and Skype. Now there are much better options such as Zoom, or GoToMeeting.
The secret lies in keeping the management of remote working simple, while at the same time producing results. Many companies producing software, including SaaS, have offered free services or subscriptions in response to the coronavirus pandemic, which itself will surely accelerate the development of remote working software. The caution is that there is a risk in rushing out new products that have not been well tested in user friendliness and customer accessibility.
Zoho—A Special Example Among Founder Services
I call Zoho a special case, since, as they claim, they offer a “unique and powerful software suite to transform the way you work”. Its 55+ software products cover:
- Sales
- Marketing
- Commerce and POS
- Service
- Finance
- Email, Storage, and Collaboration
- Human Resources
- Legal
- Security and IT Management
- BI and Analytics
- Project Management
- Developer Platforms
- IoT.
The company was founded by CEO Sridhar Vembu and Tony Thomas as AdventNet in 1996, but changed its name to Zoho in 2009. Even though it now has about 18,000 employees across the globe, it has remained privately owned and has not taken any externally funded capital. They don’t carry advertisements, even in their free version of software. The company was founded by CEO Sridhar Vembu and Tony Thomas as AdventNet in 1996, but changed its name to Zoho in 2009.
Its global headquarters are in India and its US headquarters are based in Austin, Texas. In the 1990s, in a small apartment located in the suburbs of Chennai in southern India, a simple, yet revolutionary idea was born: “Build smart technology to help businesses work better.” The idea evolved to become the world-wide technology company of today. They have more than 130 million users across 150 countries. Zoho is now a $1B+ company and amazingly this bootstrapped startup, still has no external investors. It grew organically, re-investing all its profits.