Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Embedding ISO 10218 Safety Compliance in Robots via Control Barrier Functions for Human-Robot Collaboration
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) requires strict adherence to safety standards, such as ISO 10218, to prevent harmful interactions. Standard Speed and Separation Monitoring (SSM) filters calculate safe robotic speeds based on conservative assumptions, such as constant human velocity, which prevents accurate predictions of minimum separation distances and causes unnecessary operational halts. This paper proposes a Control Barrier Function (CBF) that explicitly incorporates human acceleration data to analytically forward-predict the minimum human-robot separation distance during a worst-case robotic stopping trajectory. To guarantee safety at the control level, this predictive CBF is integrated as an inequality constraint within a Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) framework. Specifically, two methods are proposed: Method I, a CBF-constrained PD safety filter; and Method II, a task-scaling SQP controller that enforces a spatial tube constraint. Simulated and real-world experiments on a UR10e robot evaluate the two proposed methods against a standard industrial SSM module baseline. Results demonstrate that Method II dynamically modulates execution speed and confines spatial deviations. Compared to Method I, Method II achieves a 63\% reduction in mean trajectory error and avoids excessive evasive manoeuvres, ensuring high task throughput while complying with ISO 10218 SSM guidelines.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.