Like other popular services like Netflix and Max, Hulu is a streaming service that has exclusive series, current-season episodes, hit movies, Hulu Originals, kids shows, and more. There’s also a Hulu plan for nearly every kind of watcher, including streaming content with ads for a service on the cheap, or bundles for additional platforms like Disney+ and ESPN+ to get even more content at reduced prices. I have a Hulu plan to watch some of my favorite shows like critically-acclaimed Atlanta or my current fave wholesome comedy, Abbott Elementary. We at WIRED stay glued to our devices and round up the best movies and the best TV shows currently being streamed on Hulu. Right now, we have outlined various ways to save while streaming on Hulu, including the chance to pay just $1.99 per month with the Hulu student discount.
Get this Hulu Student Discount: $2 Per Month
Students can stream a bevy of shows and movies with Hulu for just $2 per month. This deal saves you 80% off the original monthly subscription price, and is valid for new and existing Hulu subscribers enrolled in an accredited college or university who meet verification qualifications. All you need to do to get Hulu for less than two bucks is verify your student status through SheerID to save.
Enjoy a Hulu TV + Live TV Free Trial
I love my Hulu account, but with half-a-dozen other streaming services, it’s been hard to keep them all, or even know which is worth the money at the end of every month. I’m trying to decide which to keep, and the Hulu TV free trial is an excellent way to test the plan and see if it fits my TV watching needs. There is a free 3-day trial to test it out, and the plan has a $0 Broadcast TV fee, $0 Regional Sports fee, $0 Set-top box or related rental fees, and a $0 administrative fee. The Hulu live TV plan is essentially the best of both worlds—your favorite streaming-only series, along with cable-only content like sports and news programming, including over 95 live TV channels like ABC and ESPN.
Watch the Latest Hulu TV Shows for Less
One of the things I love most about Hulu is that they are constantly adding both new original shows and old favorites. They truly have something for every type of watcher and mood. As a true crime lover (I know it’s problematic, I’m sorry), I’ve been excited to see the Twisted Tale of Amanda Knox.
Here’s what I’m also excited to watch this season. Classic crime drama The Rookie stars perennial heartthrob Nathan Fillion centers on a small-town man becoming the oldest rookie in the LAPD. I always look forward to the feel-good comedy Abbott Elementary, which focuses on a quirky cast of misfits in the public education system in Philadelphia. In R.J. Decker, the titular character is a conman and disgraced newspaper photographer who begins entering the dark underworld of private investigating in South Florida.
Plus, there’s something for everyone, from trash reality TV like The Bachelorette, to intriguing Paradise, to quirky comedy High Potential, to the classic boy cartoon-comedy Family Guy.