Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning for Autonomous Driving in Mixed Traffic Environment
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In mixed-traffic environments where autonomous and human-driven vehicles may co-exist, motion planning for autonomous vehicles requires anticipating the future behaviors of surrounding human drivers. Existing reinforcement learning-based methods generally directly incorporate the predicted human intents into the observation to enable a proactive planning. However, human intent is inherently uncertain due to the behavioral diversity, perception noise, and partial observability. Treating predicted intends as deterministic states can result in unsafe decisions for autonomous vehicles. To address this problem, we propose Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning (UAMP), which incorporates uncertainty in human intent prediction for AV decision-making. Specifically, UAMP first introduces a proximity-aware uncertainty estimator to quantify the interaction-conditioned intent uncertainty and constructs an uncertainty-guided joint intent distribution over surrounding human-driven vehicles. Within this uncertainty set, UAMP further introduces Uncertainty-Calibrated Value Learning (UCVL) to correct value function learning biases arising from directly incorporating uncertain human intent predictions into the observation. Extensive experiments in various mixed-traffic scenarios show that UAMP significantly improves safety and driving comfort, while maintaining traffic efficiency compared with existing approaches. The code is released at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.