As the owner of an above-ground pool, I can attest that cleaning leaves, bugs, and other detritus is an everyday chore if the cover is off. I put up with it since my pool is only in use seasonally, but WIRED reviewer Chris Null has an in-ground pool he uses year-round, so he does not have time for foolery like nets, brushes, and manual vacuums. He has been testing pool robots for years, and his favorite robot he's ever tried has been from Beatbot. It's not the cheapest of the pool robots, but it offers near-flawless performance. Luckily, this Prime Day has some of the biggest discounts we've ever seen that model and some of our other tried-and-tested favorites.
Browse our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
Our Favorite Pool Robot
WIRED reviewer Chris Null tested this top-of-the-line model with a six-hour battery life and found it does an excellent job at spiffing up pool floors and walls and capturing detritus at the waterline with AI-powered debris detection. It also floats when it's done, so it's easy to just grab instead of having to fish it off the bottom. The only downside is the fact it's a bit heavy and unwieldy, but that's not surprising given all the features on board.
“Punches Above Its Price Tag”
This one's got less battery life than the AquaSense 2 Ultra and can't skim the surface, but it does have the same floating capability to avoid underwater retrieval. WIRED Reviewer Chris Null put it through its paces and found it to be quite capable on steps and platforms, and liked that it can operate in water as shallow as 8 inches. In our guide to the Best Pool Robots, he flagged it as punching above its price tag.
The Best Skimmer We've Tested
Our top pick, the AquaSense 2 Ultra, can also skim your pool. However, if you already have a pool robot or system you like and are just looking for a skimmer only, this is the one WIRED reviewer Chris Null recommends. The solar-powered iSkim Ultra has got front-mounted sensors that keep it from slamming into your tile, though because the debris basket release button is located on the front, it will sometimes eject if it bumps into something. That was our only complaint, however, on this otherwise well-engineered device.
A Robot With a Built-in Skimmer
The most luxe member of the new Beatbot Sora lineup, the Sora 70 is the only member of the trio that includes a surface-skimming feature, letting it do double duty on both the floor of the pool and topside. All the other features of the Sora line are also in place, including an easy charging system, smart app-based control, and waterline parking when the robot’s job is done, making for easy retrieval. It’s also available in a snazzy electric purple color scheme, if you’re angling to drop a little extra style in your pool. —Christopher Null
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.