Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Robotic Nonprehensile Object Transportation with a Hanging Tray
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We consider the nonprehensile object transportation task known as the waiter's problem, in which a robot must move an object balanced on a tray from one location to another. In contrast to prior works on the robotic waiter's problem, which make the robot tilt a tray rigidly held by its end effector (EE), we use a tray suspended from the EE by ropes, such that it behaves like a three-dimensional pendulum. Some prior works have actuated the robot so that the EE simulates the behavior of a pendulum, because pendular motion reduces the shear forces acting on the transported objects, minimizing the sliding of rigid objects and sloshing in containers of liquid. In contrast, our use of a real hanging tray allows us to obtain the benefits of pendular motion while only actuating a 3 degree-of-freedom (DOF) mobile base, rather than requiring a full 6-DOF manipulator arm. Our experiments in simulation and on real hardware show that the hanging tray substantially reduces both sliding and sloshing compared to a static, rigidly-grasped tray. Furthermore, we integrate the hanging tray into an interactive robot waiter demonstration, which uses computer vision to identify people with a raised hand and visual servoing to steer toward them and allow them to access the tray.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.