Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Direction of arrival estimation from distant microphone data using single frequency filtering
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In distant microphones, broadband (BB) methods for direction-of-arrival (DoA) estimation are more suitable than narrowband (NB) methods. Due to the aggregation of their optimization function across all frequency bands, BB estimators are robust to spatial aliasing, a known problem in processing distant microphone data. In NB methods, DoA estimation is performed by utilizing \textit{local} information in each frequency band and hence the estimation is affected by spatial aliasing. However, unlike BB methods, NB methods exploit frequency sparsity to estimate the DoAs of \textit{multiple speakers} in a \textit{single time frame}. In this article, a method to improve the robustness of a NB DoA estimator to spatial aliasing is developed. The proposed method is based on cross-correlation of speech-present time-frequency regions obtained by single frequency filtering (SFF) of the microphone signals. The SFF spectrum is chosen because SFF components have regions of high signal-to-noise ratio both in time and frequency and because speech and non-speech discrimination is robust to degradations in the SFF domain. The proposed NB estimator is compared to four state-of-the-art estimators (one NB and three BB) using detection and accuracy metrics on simulated and real-world data in different reverberation and noise conditions. The results show that in all the environments, the SFF-based NB approach outperforms the state-of-the-art NB approach. Furthermore, the performance of the SFF-based approach is better than some of the BB estimators.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.