Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Act on What You See: Unlocking Safe Social Navigation in Vision-Language-Action Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Safe social navigation requires robots to distinguish people from ordinary obstacles and to react before danger becomes imminent. We show that pretrained Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models already encode pedestrian-object distinctions and future collision signals in their internal representations, but behavior cloning fails to translate these signals into socially appropriate actions. To address this mismatch, we propose SALSA, a two-stage annotation-free post-training framework: (1) social behavioral alignment bridges intermediate-layer social features to the action head and trains on counterfactual human-object scene pairs to break visual saliency shortcuts; (2) temporal safety alignment provides automatically generated future-risk supervision to enable anticipatory collision avoidance. On SCAND and real-world deployment, SALSA reduces near-collisions by 86.4% and improves social counterfactual accuracy from 53% to 93%, demonstrating that safer social navigation can be achieved by teaching VLA policies to act on representations they already possess. These results show that pretrained VLA policies can be adapted for safer social navigation by better aligning their latent representations with action generation.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.