Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:HIDVAS: A Hearing Instrument Dataset in Various Acoustical Scenarios for Algorithm Evaluation and Training
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:To evaluate the performance of audio signal processing algorithms and to train data-driven algorithms, e.g., as applied in hearing instruments, either simulated or recorded data can be used. While large batches of simulated data can be generated using mathematical models, recorded data provide a more adequate representation of real-life scenarios. Therefore, in this paper, the Hearing Instrument Dataset in Various Acoustical Scenarios (HIDVAS) is introduced. This dataset consists of both impulse responses and audio recordings using eight external loudspeakers, two external microphones, and a dummy head. On this dummy head behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing instrument shells with two microphones per shell are mounted, and in the dummy head's ears receiver-in-canal (RIC) hearing instrument loudspeakers are inserted. The dummy head also contains microphones located at its eardrum. The impulse responses have been computed from a swept-sine recording for each microphone-loudspeaker pair, and the audio recordings have been obtained by playing back audio (male and female speech, speech shaped noise, singing voice, stringed instrument, wind instrument, and percussion instrument) through each individual loudspeaker and recording simultaneously using all microphones. These recordings have been repeated for four hearing instrument domes (open, semi-open, closed, and no-RIC) in three reverberation conditions in one room (T30 = 0.09 s, T30 = 0.47 s, and T30 = 0.73 s), and in one reverberation condition in a different room (T30 = 1.48 s). The usage of the dataset as a `hearing instrument in a box' is exemplified with three example use cases.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.