Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Proprioceptive Invariant State Estimation for Humanoid Robots on Non-Inertial Ground
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:This paper presents an invariant extended Kalman filtering (InEKF) approach for real-time state estimation of humanoid robots operating on non-inertial ground using only onboard proprioceptive sensing. The proposed approach estimates the robot's base position and velocity relative to the moving ground frame without requiring direct measurements of ground motion or externally mounted sensors. By exploiting kinematic constraints at the stance foot through foot-mounted IMUs, the filter accounts for ground-induced nonlinearities in the process and measurement models while remaining fully proprioceptive. The estimator is formulated to admit a right-invariant measurement model, enabling favorable error dynamics under large initial uncertainties. Observability analysis establishes conditions under which the robot's relative base position and velocity are observable with respect to the non-inertial ground frame. Experiments with the Digit humanoid robot standing and squatting atop a swaying and pitching ground showcase a 96% speedup in convergence rate and an 80% reduction in position estimate errors over existing InEKFs. Walking experiments on a uni-axially rotating ground achieve an average estimation error of less than 9 cm for an initial error of up to 1 m.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.