Our expert, award-winning staff selects the products we cover and rigorously researches and tests our top picks. If you buy through our links, we may get a commission.Reviews ethics statement
45 of the Best Movies on Netflix You Should Stream Now
Check out some old classics and great new releases on Netflix now.
Abrar Al-HeetiSenior Technology Reporter
Abrar's interests include phones, streaming, autonomous vehicles, internet trends, entertainment, pop culture and digital accessibility. In addition to her current role, she's worked for CNET's video, culture and news teams. She graduated with bachelor's and master's degrees in journalism from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Though Illinois is home, she now loves San Francisco -- steep inclines and all.
ExpertiseAbrar has spent her career at CNET analyzing tech trends while also writing news, reviews and commentaries across mobile, streaming and online culture.Credentials
Named a Tech Media Trailblazer by the Consumer Technology Association in 2019, a winner of SPJ NorCal's Excellence in Journalism Awards in 2022 and has three times been a finalist in the LA Press Club's National Arts & Entertainment Journalism Awards.
Liz Kocan has spent the last 20 years covering TV, entertainment and working behind the scenes in digital production. While at VH1.com, she won a Webby Award and was nominated for a Shorty Award as a producer. She has also contributed her writing to USA Today, Decider, Vulture, and many other publications, and has seen every episode of 30 Rock more times than her mind grapes can remember.
It seems like Netflix's presence at award shows gets bigger every year, and the 2026 Academy Awards have proven that the streamer is a force to be reckoned with. Six Netflix original films earned 18 nominations this year, taking home seven, including for best animated feature and best original song for KPop Demon Hunters, best documentary short for All the Empty Rooms and best live-action short for The Singers. Guillermo del Toro's Frankenstein also took home three technical awards for best production design, costume design and makeup and hairstyling.
The streaming giant's combination of original films and a diverse library from other studios makes it a reliable source of entertainment, although it can sometimes be hard to narrow down what to watch. This June, tons of new titles have arrived to the platform, including several new ones with some Oscar cred. (You can see a longer list of new releases here.) We're excited to watch the recent hit Song Sung Blue, which earned Kate Hudson an Oscar nomination for Best Actress this year, plus Another Round, which won Best International feature in 2021. Also out this month on Netflix is Creed, the Rocky spinoff directed by Ryan Coogler which earned Sylvester Stallone an Oscar nomination and earned him a Golden Globe. Take a look at all our favorite movies currently on the platform.
Watch this: Why 'The Devil Wears Prada 2' is the Perfect Sequel
Song Sung Blue is based on the true story of Mike Sardina (Hugh Jackman) and Claire Cartwright-Sardina (Kate Hudson, who was nominated for an Oscar for the role), a couple who perform as a Neil Diamond tribute act known as Thunder and Lightning. The film is more focused on the couple's personal lives and the many setbacks they endured, but it's been lauded for the actors' heartfelt performances.
MGM
Creed (2015)
Ryan Coogler directed the 2015 sports drama Creed, a continuation of the Rocky boxing universe. In the film, Michael B. Jordan stars as Adonis Creed, the son of Rocky Balboa's (Sylvester Stallone) rival, Apollo Creed, who travels to Philadelphia to be trained by Balboa. The film and its two sequels, Creed II and Creed II, which all star Jordan and Stallone, arrived to Netflix this June.
Zentropa Entertainments
Another Round (2020)
Another Round, which won the 2021 Oscar for Best International Feature, is the story of four high school teachers who conduct an experiment to see what happens when they maintain a constant level of alcohol in their blood. What begins as an experiment meant to boost their creativity and allow them to relax becomes more complicated when they start to push the boundaries and their drunkenness interferes with their family and work lives. Mads Mikkelsen won several awards for his role in the film.
Gramercy Pictures
The Big Lebowski (1998)
1998's The Big Lebowski is one of Joel and Ethan Coen's most iconic films. The film stars Jeff Bridges stars as Jeffrey "The Dude" Lebowski, a man who gets involved with all the wrong types of people after he's mistaken for a different Jeffrey Lebowski. The film co-stars John Goodman, Julianne Moore, Tara Reid, Steve Buscemi and Philip Seymour Hoffman. Pour yourself a White Russian and enjoy this modern classic while it's available on the platform.
Elevated Films
Dead Man's Wire (2025)
Gus Van Sant directed Dead Man's Wire, a thriller based on the true story of Tony Kiritsis (Bill Skarsgård), a man who took his mortgage broker, Richard Hall (Stranger Things star Dacre Montgomery), hostage in 1977, attaching him to a dead man's switch that's wired to a shotgun that will shoot and kill him if he attempts to escape. Filled with tension and a frenetic performance from Skarsgård, the film is a suspenseful and exciting thrill ride. The cast includes Cary Elwes, Al Pacino, Myha'la and Colman Domingo
Swapped (2026)
In Swapped, Oscar-winner Michael B. Jordan voices Ollie, a small woodland animal called a pookoo, whose whole species is under threat by their natural adversaries, the javans, fierce, large birds who monopolize all the food Ollie and the pookoos eat. When Ollie accidentally swaps bodies with a javan named Ivy (voiced by Juno Temple), they're forced to work together to not only swap their bodies back, but to bring their two species together in peace. The film has lingered in the Netflix Top 10 since its release and has garnered 38.7 million views, the most views in a single week for any Netflix animated movie, even surpassing K-Pop Demon Hunters.
Netflix
Marty, Life Is Short (2026)
Martin Short got his start performing onstage in Canada in the 1970s, which eventually led him to Saturday Night Live and Hollywood. Along the way, he endured some majors losses – the deaths of his parents and a brother, and later the death of his wife and daughter – and yet, through it all, he has not let his grief dominate his life, In Marty, Life is Short, directed by Lawrence Kasdan, Short, along with many of his closest friends, including Steve Martin, Tom Hanks, Catherine O'Hara and Steven Spielberg, reflect on Short's life, relationships and career and the fact that despite many low points and failures, he has never not tried to have fun.
Universal Pictures
Nope (2022)
In Jordan Peele's 2022 thriller Nope, Daniel Kaluuya and Keke Palmer star as siblings OJ and Emerald Haywood, whose family ranch has trained horses for Hollywood movies for decades. After the death of their father, OJ and Emerald begin selling off their horses to a former child star, Ricky "Jupe" Park (Steven Yeun), who is starting his own Western-themed amusement park, and at the same time, horses begin to disappear off the Haywood's ranch, the result of an unidentified flying object. Both Jupe and the Haywoods decide to try and capitalize on the UFO's existence, to very different results. Like Peele's directorial debut, Get Out, Nope explores deeper themes of race and exploitation through a horror lens.
Universal Pictures
Black Phone 2 (2025)
Ethan Hawke stars as a diabolical killer in a creepy mask in Black Phone and Black Phone 2, both of which are currently available on Netflix. (Black Phone 2 just arrived earlier this month, making it the perfect time to make it a double feature.) In the first film, Mason Thames stars as Finney Blake, a teenager abducted by the serial child killer known as the Grabber. While in the Grabber's lair, Finney encounters a black rotary phone that allow him to communicate with the ghosts of the Grabber's past victims to help him escape. In the follow-up film, The Grabber, who is now dead, is the one calling Finney and threatening him from beyond the grave.
Columbia Pictures
Tootsie (1982)
Tootsie, the Sidney Pollack comedy about a desperate actor (Dustin Hoffman) who dresses as a woman in order to get a role on a soap opera, is often considered one of the great films of the 1980s, earning co-star Jessica Lange a best supporting actress Oscar. The movie arrived to Netflix this month and is the ideal pick if you need a lighthearted comedy, or love a movie set in a grittier, bygone era of New York City.
Searchlight Pictures
Poor Things (2023)
Poor Things earned Emma Stone her second Oscar (her first was for La La Land), and it marks her second collaboration with director Yorgos Lanthimos. In the film, Stone stars as Bella Baxter, a woman resurrected by a mad scientist, Godwin Baxter (Willem Defoe), after she killed herself. Newly reborn, she begins to experience the world as a child would, seeing everything through fresh eyes, including sex, which she becomes obsessed with. Though Godwin attempts to control her (as do the other men who enter her life), she becomes her own woman, living by her own rules. Ramy Youssef, Mark Ruffalo and Christopher Abbott co-star in the film which just arrived to Netflix last week.
Focus Features
Bugonia (2025)
In the Oscar-nominated Bugonia, Emma Stone stars as a CEO who is kidnapped by two conspiracy theorists (Jesse Plemons and Aidan Delbis) who believe her to be an alien. The film is the fourth collaboration between Stone and director Yorgos Lanthimos – why not make it a double features with Poor Things?
Ghostbusters (1984)
Like Tootsie, Ghostbusters is a comedy that's also a vintage New York-in-the-'80s film. The film stars Dan Aykroyd, Bill Burray, Harold Ramis and Ernie Hudson as paranormal scientists trying to keep New York's spectral population under control. Sigourney Weaver, Annie Potts and Rick Moranis also co-star in this classic.
Touchstone Pictures
Pretty Woman (1990)
Julia Roberts became synonymous with the phrase "pretty woman" after her star-making turn in the 1990 Garry Marshall film where she starred as an escort who falls for a wealthy businessman (Richard Gere). The film has more iconic, quotable lines than I can count, a killer 1990s soundtrack and impeccable supporting performances from Laura San Giacomo and Hector Elizondo. This modern classic just arrived to the platform. If you don't watch it, well... big mistake. Huge.
Searchlight Pictures
28 Years Later: The Bone Temple (2025)
28 Years Later and its follow-up, 28 Years Later: The Bone Temple are the newest films in the zombie series about a viral outbreak that has ravaged England and placed it under quarantine with almost no contact with the rest of the world. Right now, you can catch both films on the platform; The Bone Temple just arrived last week. Ralph Fiennes portrayal as Dr. Ian Kelson is not to be missed.
Neon
Anatomy of a Fall (2023)
The 2023 film Anatomy of a Fall received the 2023 Oscar for best original screenplay and was nominated for four other Academy Awards. The gripping legal drama follows a French novelist, Sandra Voyter (Sandra Hüller), as a woman whose husband plunges to his death from an upstairs window of their home in the Alps. Was the fall accidental? Did Sandra push him? Or did he kill himself? The mystery and ambiguity of it all will keep you guessing and forming your own opinions, and you'll never hear 50 Cent quite the same way again. The film just arrived on Netflix this month.
Netflix
Peaky Blinders: The Immortal Man (2026)
Cillian Murphy is back as Tommy Shelby in Peaky Blinders: The Immortal Man. The film picks up a few years after the end of the sixth season of the Peaky Blinders series, in 1940, smack in the middle of World War II. After a self-imposed exile, Tommy Shelby returns to Birmingham and, as you can expect, the past and his family drama have come back to haunt him. The film was directed by Tom Harper and written by Steven Knight, and has a stellar cast with Barry Keoghan, Rebecca Ferguson, Tim Roth and Stephen Graham.
Netflix
All The Empty Rooms (2025)
In the Oscar-winning documentary short, All The Empty Rooms, CBS News reporter Steve Hartman and photographer Lou Bopp embark on a cross-country trip to visit and memorialize the bedrooms of children who were killed in school shootings. It's a hard watch, to be sure, but a necessary reminder that we can be doing more to prevent future tragedies.
Sony Pictures Classics
Blue Moon (2025)
Blue Moon was released in theaters in 2025 and received two Oscar nods this year, one for Ethan Hawke's lead performance as songwriter Lorenz Hart and another for Best Original Screenplay. In the film, a depressed Hart struggles to accept the success of his former songwriting partner Richard Rodgers (played by Andrew Scott). Bobby Cannavale and Margaret Qualley also co-star. The film, directed by Richard Linklater, marks his ninth film collaboration with Hawke.
Netflix
The Singers (2026)
The Singers is a film adaptation of a 19th-century short story written by Ivan Turgenev about a group of pub-goers who turn their depressing night of boozing into an impromptu sing-off. The Oscar-winning short film stars a group of relative unknowns whose singing talents were discovered via social media, and was directed by Sam A. Davis. (In a rare and surprising Oscars moment, The Singers actually tied for their award with another nominee, Two People Exchanging Saliva, which is available to watch on YouTube.)
Netflix
KPop Demon Hunters (2025)
The Netflix original animated film KPop Demon Hunters premiered in June and quickly rose through the ranks to become the platform's most-watched original film of all time. The film, about a KPop group that performs by day and hunts demons in their downtime, has a soundtrack that's already been certified Platinum thanks to hits like "Golden" and "Soda Pop." The film stars Arden Cho, May Hong and Ji Young Yoo as the titular girl group tasked with fighting off a demonic boy band. (Can't get enough of the movie? Check out the theatrical sing-along version and lyric videos that are also available to stream.) The film was also honored with two Golden Globes this year for Best Original Song and Best Animated Motion Picture and won Oscars in those same categories at this year's ceremony.
Netflix
Frankenstein (2025)
Guillermo del Toro's Frankenstein received nine Oscar nominations this year and took home three. The film, a reimagining of the Mary Shelley classic, is pure del Toro, filled with the dark, fantastical style the director is known for. It stars Oscar Isaac as the mad scientist Victor Frankenstein and Jacob Elordi nabbed an Oscar nomination for his turn as the Monster.
Netflix
Train Dreams (2025)
Joel Edgerton stars in Train Dreams, an Oscar-nominated drama that has won awards at several film festivals and the Independent Spirit Awards this year. The film takes place roughly a century ago; Edgerton stars as Robert Grainier, a logger in the Pacific Northwest struggling to build a life for himself and his family. The story is adapted from the novella of the same name by Denis Johnson and costars Felicity Jones, Kerry Condon and William H. Macy.
IFC Films
Boyhood (2014)
Richard Linklater's Boyhood was filmed over a span of 12 years, from 2002 until 2013, and chronicles in real time, the adolescence of a young boy named Mason (Ellar Coltrane) as he grows up. Clocking in at nearly three hours, the film feels documentary-like as it shows its characters in real-life settings discussing current events of the time. (It was scripted as filming went along.) The result is refreshingly original and moving. Ethan Hawke, Patricia Arquette and Lorelai Linklater (Richard Linklater's daughter) co-star.
Netflix
The Perfect Neighbor (2025)
Directed and produced by Geeta Gandbhir, The Perfect Neighbor is a harrowing documentary about the killing of Ajike Owens, a Florida woman who was shot to death on June 2, 2023, by her neighbor, Susan Louise Lorincz. The film's use of police body camera footage and 911 calls lay out the neighborhood disputes stemming from Lorincz's erratic and unsettling behavior and the escalating tension that led to the killing.
Sony Pictures Animation
Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse (2018)
Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse is the first animated Spider-Man feature in the Marvel canon, and the film follows Brooklyn teenager Miles Morales (Shameik Moore) as he becomes the new Spider-Man and teams up with other Spider-People from various parallel universes to save his universe from the Kingpin (voiced by Liev Schreiber). The film's other Spider-Men are played by Jake Johnson, John Mulaney, Kimiko Glenn and Nicolas Cage. The rest of the cast is top-notch, too.
Netflix
Wake Up Dead Man: A Knives Out Mystery (2025)
Daniel Craig returns for a third time as Benoit Blanc in the newest film in the Knives Out mystery series, Wake Up Dead Man. This time around, the charming detective has been summoned to a small town in New York to investigate the death of a monsignor at a small church, and everyone in the sprawling A-list ensemble is a suspect. The film co-stars Glenn Close, Andrew Scott, Josh O'Connor, Mila Kunis, Kerry Washington and others. Why not make it a double feature and watch 2022's Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery, also on Netflix, while you're at it?
Toho
Godzilla Minus One (2023)
Godzilla Minus One is an Academy Award-winning Japanese-language movie written and directed by Takashi Yamazaki. Set in 1945, the story centers around Kōichi Shikishima, a young pilot dealing with PTSD in a post-World War II era. After surviving an encounter with Godzilla, he and others realize the kaiju is gearing up to attack Tokyo. A sequel to the Sony film has also just been announced; Godzilla Minus Zero is expected in theaters in late 2026.
Based on the comic book by Greg Rucka, the action-fantasy The Old Guard stars Charlize Theron as one of a group of immortal mercenaries who are able to regenerate even after being killed. When they're tracked down and hunted by a pharmaceutical company that intends to study them, they fight back in an effort to protect themselves. The first film, released in 2020, was such a success that a sequel, The Old Guard 2, premiered in 2025 with Uma Thurman cast as Theron's newest adversary.
Sony Pictures
One of Them Days (2025)
One of Them Days is pure comedy gold. It's the perfect (R-rated) film when you're looking for something silly and fun and packed with great jokes and performances. The movie is part of the "desperate best friends embark on a mission with a deadline" genre (see also: Booksmart, Plan B) as best friends Dreux (Kiki Palmer) and Alyssa (SZA in her film debut) try to track down the rent money that was stolen by Alyssa's boyfriend before the end of the day. When they realize the money is gone, they desperately try to make all the money they need in one day, leading them to sell a pair of stolen Jordans and stage an art show to sell some of Alyssa's paintings. The film, which arrived on Netflix in March, features hilarious cameos from Katt Williams, Janelle James and Lil Rel Howery. Rumor has it a sequel is in the works.
Yoo Eun Mi/Netflix
Ballerina (2023)
Netflix's K-drama collection has a few hidden gems, including Ballerina, a 2023 revenge story about a former bodyguard seeking justice for her friend. Jang Ok-ju stops at nothing to make the offenders pay in this action-packed thriller. (Just don't get this Ballerina confused with the recent release of the same name starring Ana de Armas, which is also an action-packed revenge story -- that one's not on Netflix, at least not yet.)
Lewis Jacobs/Netflix
Rez Ball (2024)
A powerful story about a high school basketball team in New Mexico, Rez Ball takes viewers on a journey with the Chuska Warriors. When a tragic event strikes the team, it faces challenges on and off the court -- but still aims for a championship title. Co-written by Sydney Freeland and Sterlin Harjo (co-creator of Reservation Dogs), the movie is based on the novel Canyon Dreams: A Basketball Season on the Navajo Nation.
Netflix
Hit Man (2024)
The 2024 action comedy was one of several movies starring Glen Powell that helped cement his leading-man status. The film, co-written by Powell and director Richard Linklater, stars Powell as a nerdy professor drawn into an undercover investigation. Disguising himself as a hitman, he adopts a new persona for each client -- until he falls for a woman (Adria Arjona) who hires him to kill her abusive husband.
Netflix
My Octopus Teacher (2020)
2020's My Octopus Teacher won an Oscar for best documentary feature for telling a personal and poignant story of the friendship between a man and an octopus he meets while diving. Filmed over the course of a year, Craig Foster documented the kinship he formed with the octopus who would repeatedly and playfully approach him. The film explores the often unseen personality of a creature found in the wild who ends up giving Foster insight into nature and his own relationships. If you're inspired by the natural world, the film's director Pippa Ehrlich's follow-up feature, Pangolin: Kulu's Journey, is on Netflix now, too.
Netflix
1917 (2019)
The critically lauded Oscar-winning film, 1917, directed by Sam Mendes about World War I, was remarkable for the fact that it was filmed with the intent of making it appear as though the entire movie was shot as two long, continuous takes. The movie stars George MacKay and Dean-Charles Chapman playing British soldiers traveling across a dangerous battle zone rigged by Germans in an effort to deliver a message to their superiors warning them of an impending attack. The film's stellar supporting cast includes Andrew Scott, Benedict Cumberbatch, Mark Strong and Richard Madden.
Netflix
Ma Rainey's Black Bottom (2020)
Ma Rainey's Black Bottom is dedicated to the memory of Chadwick Boseman, who made his final screen appearance in the film before his death in 2020. The film stars Boseman as Levee Green, a member of blues singer Ma Rainey's band (Viola Davis), and takes place amid one of the band's conflict-ridden and turbulent recording sessions in 1920s Chicago. Taylour Paige, Colman Domingo and Glynn Turman co-star in the film that was adapted from August Wilson's 1982 play.
Colman Domingo earned an Oscar nomination for his portrayal of civil rights activist Bayard Rustin in this film about a man whose legacy has often been overlooked in civil rights history. Bayard Rustin fought alongside Martin Luther King Jr. and helped organize the 1963 March on Washington and the Freedom Rides, among other major historic events.
Rustin's outspoken activism and homosexuality made him a target -- not just for political adversaries but sometimes even among his allies. The film explores the life of a man whose legacy has long been overlooked.
This biographical film nabbed seven Academy Award nominations, including Best Original Screenplay, Best Cinematography and Best Picture. Maestro tells the story of conductor Leonard Bernstein (Bradley Cooper) and his relationship with actor Felicia Montealegre (Carey Mulligan). In addition to starring in the romance drama, Cooper also directed and co-wrote the film and produced it alongside Hollywood legends Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg.
Based on the novel by Elena Ferrante, The Lost Daughter stars Olivia Colman as a woman traveling alone to a seaside resort where she observes a mother and daughter. They send her into a bit of a spiral, recalling her own experiences as a young mother. The screenplay was adapted and directed by Maggie Gyllenhaal in her directorial debut.
The award-winning film, Society of the Snow, is based on true events and adapted from the book of the same name. In 1972, a rugby team from Uruguay boarded a plane to Chile for a game. The plane crashed in the Andes mountains, leaving survivors to contend with injuries, illness, cold temperatures and death. Not everyone makes it and those facing death make agonizing choices to live.
If you weren't around at the time, it's hard to explain just how huge We Are the World was. Recorded by a supergroup of popular musicians -- assembled on the fly on the night of the 1985 American Music Awards -- the charity single benefiting Ethiopian famine victims sold more than 20 million copies and featured the likes of Michael Jackson, Lionel Richie, Bob Dylan, Bruce Springsteen and Diana Ross. (It feels impossible to imagine so many megastars assembling in one room for something like this today.)
Luckily for us, there were cameras rolling the entire time as dozens of the world's most famous musicians pulled the epic all-night recording session. The recently departed Quincy Jones proves to be the night's true star, wrangling a studio full of nerves, egos and a little too much wine to produce something genuinely special.
This animated drama, based on the graphic novel of the same name, is set in a futuristic medieval world, in which a knight (Riz Ahmed) is framed for a crime. A shapeshifting teenager named Nimona (Chloë Grace Moretz) -- whom he's been trained to destroy -- may be his only hope for proving his innocence.
This biographical film tells the story of two sisters, Yusra (Nathalie Issa) and Sarah Mardini (Manal Issa), who escape war-torn Syria. Amid all the strife and upheaval, Yusra works toward her dream of swimming in the Olympics. It's a touching narrative of hope and survival.
A World War I drama based on the classic novel of the same name, this epic depicts the horrors of war through the eyes of 17-year-old German soldier Paul Bäumer (Felix Kammerer). At first enthused about joining the army, in spite of his parents' wishes, Bäumer gets a violent wake-up call. All Quiet on the Western Front was a dominating force at the 95th Annual Academy Awards, as it was nominated for nine Oscars and ultimately walked away with four, including best international feature film.
Alfonso Cuarón's Roma nabbed him the best director Oscar in 2018 (the film earned two other Oscars that year, too), a first for a foreign-language film. Its inclusion in the award show marked the first time a film distributed by a streaming platform was eligible for major awards. The film, set in the early 1970s, stars Yalitza Aparicio as the live-in housekeeper for a wealthy Mexico City family as she deals with her own pregnancy, the troubles within the family she works for and the escalating political turmoil in the city around her.
Abrar's interests include phones, streaming, autonomous vehicles, internet trends, entertainment, pop culture and digital accessibility. In addition to her current role, she's worked for CNET's video, culture and news teams. She graduated with bachelor's and master's degrees in journalism from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Though Illinois is home, she now loves San Francisco -- steep inclines and all.See full bio
LIZ KOCAN
Liz Kocan has spent the last 20 years covering TV, entertainment and working behind the scenes in digital production. While at VH1.com, she won a Webby Award and was nominated for a Shorty Award as a producer. She has also contributed her writing to USA Today, Decider, Vulture, and many other publications, and has seen every episode of 30 Rock more times than her mind grapes can remember.See full bio