Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:LEGS: Laplacian-Enhanced Gaussian Splatting with a Nonlinear Weighted Loss
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become an efficient explicit representation for radiance field reconstruction and real-time novel view synthesis. However, its standard photometric loss treats flat and structure-rich regions similarly, which may limit the recovery of sharp contours and fine details. Edge-Guided Gaussian Splatting (EGGS) improves structure awareness through edge-guided weighting, but mainly relies on first-order gradient responses and linear weighting. In this paper, we propose LEGS, a Laplacian-Enhanced Gaussian Splatting method with a nonlinearly weighted loss. LEGS replaces first-order gradient guidance with second-order Laplacian structural guidance and maps the normalized Laplacian response into pixel-wise weights through nonlinear response-to-weight functions. The proposed loss improves structure-aware Gaussian optimization while keeping the original 3DGS rendering pipeline unchanged. Experiments on the full Tanks\&Temples and Mip-NeRF360 datasets show that LEGS improves peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) by up to 1.68 dB over 3DGS and up to 0.52 dB over EGGS. Incorporating the proposed second-order nonlinear weighting strategy into FastGS and FasterGS further improves PSNR by up to 1.69 dB, demonstrating its effectiveness as a general loss-level extension for Gaussian Splatting pipelines with potential applications in AR/VR, immersive visualization, and real-time 3D content generation.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.