Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Learning to Assist: Collaborative VLAs for Implicit Human-Robot Collaboration
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Human-robot collaboration (HRC) combines the complementary strengths of humans and robots to improve task efficiency. However, many existing collaborative systems rely on hand-engineered pipelines, limiting their scalability and flexibility for new tasks. In this work, we show that models trained end-to-end with imitation learning, specifically vision-language-action (VLA) models, can support collaborative manipulation, and characterize the key factors affecting their real-world performance. We evaluate two state-of-the-art models and identify a failure mode of action-chunking policies in implicit HRC, where demonstration action leakage (i.e., action chunks crossing latent task transitions) can cause premature assistive behavior. We find that this issue increases with longer execution horizons and occurs in real-world collaborative VLA systems, such as when a robot attempts to hand over a tool before the person is ready. We propose an inference-time steering method to mitigate these erroneous assistive actions while preserving policy performance. Finally, through a 16-participant user study on a long-horizon collaborative assembly task, we show that steering enables a longer execution horizon while mitigating premature assistance, leading to faster collaboration and fewer failures compared to a shorter-horizon policy.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.