Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge. The purple category is fun once you spot the connection. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: You rule!
Green group hint: Used in math.
Blue group hint: How you say things.
Purple group hint: Loud sounds.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Dominant.
Green group: Multiplication indicators.
Blue group: Pronunciation descriptors.
Purple group: Starting with explosive onomatopoeia.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is dominant. The four answers are alpha, head, lead and primary.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is multiplication indicators. The four answers are by, times, X and •.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is pronunciation descriptors. The four answers are short, silent, soft and stressed.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is starting with explosive onomatopoeia. The four answers are Bangkok (bang), boomer (boom), Popsicle (pop) and powder (pow).