Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Optimizing Multiple Feature Types for Image Inpainting in the Linear and Nonlinear Setting
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Inpainting-based compression stores a carefully optimized subset of the full image data and reconstructs the missing data by inpainting. The quality of these lossy codecs depends decisively on the stored data. So far, these data consist almost exclusively of pixel locations along with their grayscale or color values. In the present paper, we present a general theory and a practical framework that allows to incorporate arbitrary features which can be described by linear or nonlinear equations. This includes e.g. derivatives of arbitrary order or local integrals. Our features can be combined with linear or nonlinear inpainting operators. Moreover, we present an algorithm that automatically optimizes the location and the type of the selected feature. The approach of allowing different types of optimized features turns inpainting-based compression into a more general, versatile and powerful paradigm. Our experiments report a consistent quality gain when increasing the number of feature types from 1 to 5. With the same amount of stored data, the average peak signal-to-noise improvement is 2.76 dB for harmonic (homogeneous diffusion) inpainting, and 1.82 dB for edge-enhancing diffusion inpainting.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.