Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Inductive Generalization for Robotic Manipulation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Understanding the generalization capabilities of visuomotor policies is essential in the development of capable robotic agents. Generalizable models learn structures that transfer across domains. However, in practice, visuomotor policies test performance by interpolation on known distributions using unstructured domain shifts (e.g. lighting, clutter, diverse objects). We argue that to measure generalization capabilities we must instead test the inductive capacity of policies on progressively harder, out-of-distribution task variants. We call this inductive generalization, drawing directly on how axis-based evaluation has revealed inherent generalization limitations in language models (e.g. sequence length, counting) arXiv:2502.00197 . We provide a reusable and formal evaluation protocol for measuring inductive generalization in any manipulation policy, and establish baselines showing that existing paradigms fail this test; e.g. SoTA Vision-Language-Action models and find that policies that appear to generalize to prior domain shifts (distractors, etc) fail inductive generalization tests. These results expose a class of learning challenges orthogonal to those addressed by data and model scaling in robot learning, yet are imperative to solve in order to realize general purpose robots.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.