Looking for the most recent Strands answer? Click here for our daily Strands hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections and Connections: Sports Edition puzzles.
My daughter is graduating from high school today, and today's NYT Strands puzzle offers perfect inspiration for her and her classmates. They've come through so much, and might need some encouragement to go forward! Some of the answers are difficult to unscramble, so if you need hints and answers, read on.
I go into depth about the rules for Strands in this story.
If you're looking for today's Wordle, Connections and Mini Crossword answers, you can visit CNET's NYT puzzle hints page.
Read more: NYT Connections Turns 1: These Are the 5 Toughest Puzzles So Far
Hint for today's Strands puzzle
Today's Strands theme is: Moving mountains
If that doesn't help you, here's a clue: Encouraging words.
Clue words to unlock in-game hints
Your goal is to find hidden words that fit the puzzle's theme. If you're stuck, find any words you can. Every time you find three words of four letters or more, Strands will reveal one of the theme words. These are the words I used to get those hints but any words of four or more letters that you find will work:
- COME, VOTE, VOTER, SHARE, HARE, CONS, HIVE, THIN, MUST, OVER, THIS, MOUNT
Answers for today's Strands puzzle
These are the answers that tie into the theme. The goal of the puzzle is to find them all, including the spangram, a theme word that reaches from one side of the puzzle to the other. When you have all of them (I originally thought there were always eight but learned that the number can vary), every letter on the board will be used. Here are the nonspangram answers:
- QUASH, CONQUER, OVERCOME, SURMOUNT, VANQUISH
Today's Strands spangram
Today's Strands spangram is YOUVEGOTTHIS. To find it, start with the Y that's the very first letter on the top horizontal row, and wind down and over.
Toughest Strands puzzles
Here are some of the Strands topics I've found to be the toughest.
#1: Dated slang. Maybe you didn't even use this lingo when it was cool. Toughest word: PHAT.
#2: Thar she blows! I guess marine biologists might ace this one. Toughest word: BALEEN or RIGHT.
#3: Off the hook. Again, it helps to know a lot about sea creatures. Sorry, Charlie. Toughest word: BIGEYE or SKIPJACK.