SpaceX’s IPO on Friday allows the public to buy shares of the combined rocket, AI, and social media company for the first time, and raised enough money to make Elon Musk the first trillionaire.
He has more wealth, on paper at least, than the economies of nations like Ireland, Sweden, or his home country of South Africa (CNN cites the International Monetary Fund saying only 20 countries have economies larger than $1.1 trillion), now linked to the promise of a business based on launching AI datacenters into space.
Follow along here for the latest updates.
Days after its massive IPO, SpaceX says it is spending $60 billion to buy Cursor — a bet designed to help Elon Musk’s sprawling rocket / AI / social media behemoth win over lucrative enterprise customers and close the gap with AI rivals like Anthropic and OpenAI.
The takeover was not entirely unexpected: SpaceX announced a peculiar arrangement in April in which it agreed to either acquire the programming platform for $60 billion or pay a $10 billion breakup fee. The company had been holding off completing the deal while going public.
Read Article >- SpaceX reportedly rented out Colossus 1 AI data center after it ran into latency issues.
While SpaceX plans satellite-based AI servers, Bloomberg reports it ran into trouble trying to develop and run Grok AI in Memphis, citing unnamed sources. They claim that deals renting capacity to Anthropic ($15 billion annually) and Google ($920 million per month) happened following hardware variation and lag issues:
Elon Musk’s company had planned to train its most cutting-edge AI models on a massive amount of computing power by using a cluster of three data center campuses. However, the firm encountered latency issues when connecting Colossus 1 with two other sites located more than 10 miles away, the people said, compounded by aging network infrastructure.
Elon Musk’s SpaceX IPO will probably make him the richest person to ever walk the planet. And while his mountain of horrible personal conduct could fill multiple books, one fact in particular stands out: A year ago, Musk’s actions directly led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people. He did it knowingly. And, worse — gleefully.
This is not a serious person, but his abuse of the world is deadly serious. In the first months of President Donald Trump’s second term, the Musk-led Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) destroyed the US Agency for International Development, whose mission was a boon to public health around the globe. Musk called the lifesaving agency a “criminal organization” and blithely celebrated spending a weekend “feeding USAID into the wood chipper.” It was a good reference if you want everyone to think you’re the killer in Fargo. Mission accomplished, Elon.
Read Article >- Forbes Real-Time Billionaires list adds a trillionaire.
With the debut of SPCX, Elon Musk’s 4.8 billion shares are enough to push his wealth beyond $1.1 trillion, as noted on Forbes’ “definitive, minute-by-minute guide to every billionaire around the globe.”
Elon Musk is now officially the world’s first trillionaire. That is a colossal amount of wealth (and by proxy, power) for one individual to have. Its scale — a thousand times more than a billion — is difficult to fathom for those of us who aren’t among the 3,363 billionaires that currently exist in our world. But let’s try to comprehend it anyway.
The most frequently cited comparison is time. If you were to count out a million seconds, it would take you 11 and a half days. A billion seconds would take you 31.7 years. But a trillion seconds would take 31,700 years — to reach that point today, you would have needed to start counting in the Paleolithic era, around the time that Neanderthals went extinct.
Read Article >Elon Musk’s net worth has passed the trillion-dollar mark after SpaceX’s IPO. His net worth, which was hovering around $800 billion before the IPO, includes the value of his 4.8 billion shares in SpaceX, along with his wealth from his other companies, like Tesla. Shares of SPCX opened at $150 and have remained well above the $138 benchmark that gives Musk a 13-figure net worth.
SpaceX combined Musk’s rocket, AI, and social media platforms earlier this year, and said in its S-1 that its goal is to “build the systems and technologies necessary to make life multiplanetary, to understand the true nature of the universe, and to extend the light of consciousness to the stars.” It also claims this combination is uniquely positioned to deliver on the concept of “orbital AI compute” by putting AI data center servers in space via reusable rockets.
Read Article >- SPCX opens at $150 per share.
As reported by CNBC, the New York Times, and others, trading commenced at a price 11 percent above the $135 IPO price, but lower than the $175 shown in some earlier indications. It’s already spiked as high as $167, before falling back to $155. As long as the share price remains above $138, that is enough to make Elon Musk the world’s first trillionaire.
It also gives SpaceX a market cap of over $2 trillion, making it currently the 6th most valuable public company in the US.
SpaceX is now a publicly traded company.
In one of the most highly anticipated and controversial public offerings of all time, the rocket venture helmed by Elon Musk started trading on Nasdaq on June 12th at the take-it-or-leave-it price of $135-per-share — though most retail investors will likely pay far more.
Read Article >Elon Musk, on the verge of becoming the world’s first trillionaire, is whipping up anti-immigration tensions amid ongoing riots in Belfast, Northern Ireland. Following a knife attack in the city on Monday, Musk declared support for Restore Britain, a hard-right populist political party that advocates for large-scale migrant deportation in the UK. He reposted statements from party leader Rupert Lowe calling for “a vast number of people” to be forced out of the country, as well as a promise from Lowe to “prosecute officials and politicians who knowingly placed dangerous third world savages in our communities.” “This is the way,” Musk added to his repost.
Musk also shared a list of protest locations in the city, saying, “Only by protesting REPEATEDLY and LOUDLY will there be any change!!”
Read Article >- Here’s the first SpaceX AI data center.
“What we’re showing here is kind of a draft version of the version one of the SpaceX AI satellite,” said Elon Musk at the reveal on Monday. “It’s actually much simpler than a Starlink satellite.” The release of renders and specs for the space-based AI1 data center is very much timed to lend credence to the SpaceX IPO, which is set to begin trading on Friday.
I haven’t seen anything as stupid as the WeWork IPO document in a very long time — that is, until Elon Musk filed to take SpaceX public. WeWork was a joke. SpaceX is a threat. And if Musk and his bankers have their way, you are going to be their bagholder.
Lots of the top-line details leaked long before the S-1 filing itself became public. There’s the rumored valuation of more than $1 trillion. That’s despite the nearly $5 billion in losses last year. The total addressable market (TAM) for SpaceX — the amount of revenue SpaceX thinks it could make if won over what it thinks is its entire customer base — was listed as $28.5 trillion. By way of comparison, the gross domestic product of the US as a whole was a hair over $24 trillion, according to the St. Louis Fed.
Read Article >The Pentagon awarded SpaceX a $4.16 billion contract to build missile-tracking satellites linked with President Donald Trump’s planned “Golden Dome” defense system, as reported earlier by Bloomberg. In an announcement on Friday, the US Space Force says the sensor-equipped satellites will allow it to detect and track targets from space.
The Elon Musk-owned SpaceX — which recently filed for what could be the biggest initial public offering ever — already has contracts with the Space Force to develop other parts of the Golden Dome. Similar to Israel’s Iron Dome, Trump’s pricey defense system would identify and take down missiles and other airborne targets. SpaceX is set to develop prototypes for space-based interceptors for the Golden Dome and also won a $2.29 billion contract to develop its data network.
Read Article >The SpaceX IPO is here, and it’s more than just an historic public offering that could make Elon Musk the world’s first trillionaire. It also reveals more ways in which Elon Musk’s companies interact and overlap with each other, shuffling money around in ways that are often difficult to keep track of.
This is evident in ways that are both obvious and less so. A CTRL-F search for “Tesla” yields 87 results, “xAI” is mentioned 356 times, “Grok” 243 times, and “X” 267 times. Even the “Boring Company” (7 times), “Neuralink” (3), and “Optimus” (1) get a few mentions. Throughout its 330 pages of rocket launches and interplanetary wishes, you can trace the network of ways in which Musk’s companies deal with each other.
Read Article >Elon Musk’s final frontier is officially open for business now that SpaceX has formally filed its S-1 prospectus with the SEC. That kicks off what could be the largest initial public offering ever when it lists on the Nasdaq stock exchange with the ticker SPCX.
SpaceX generated $18.67 billion in revenue in 2025, driven largely by its Starlink satellite internet service, which brought in more than $11 billion, as reported by The Wall Street Journal. The company lost over $4.9 billion last year, with capital expenditures soaring to $20.7 billion last year, a leap from $11.2 billion in 2024, as reported by The New York Times. xAI, which recently merged with SpaceX, lost billions last year, while growing revenue by 22 percent, according to TechCrunch.
Read Article >The great SpaceX IPO is looming, allowing outside investors — including regular Joe Schmoes, or retail investors — to buy a stake in one of the buzziest and most controversial companies on the planet for the first time. Depending on who you ask, it’s either the best investment opportunity you’ll see this decade or a fool’s errand to rip off credulous Musk fanboys. With valuations of the company going to sky-high levels, over $1 trillion according to some estimates, there’s certainly a furor around the potential for rich returns.
But is there really any money to be made in space?
Read Article >What’s expected to be the biggest IPO in human history is reportedly underway. SpaceX has filed for an initial public offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission, according to a report from Bloomberg. But for now, the filing is confidential.
Under SEC rules, SpaceX isn’t required to make its S-1 prospectus public until 15 days before it begins pitching to investors on its roadshow. That means we’ll have to wait for details like Starlink’s subscriber revenue, the cash burn rate of the Starship program, and how the recently absorbed xAI fits into the corporate structure.
Read Article >I am excited about the SpaceX IPO for all the reasons investors shouldn’t be. Maybe it’ll be a real marquee moment for Silicon Valley, but I see the potential for a shitshow. After all, more than a decade ago, Musk said that SpaceX going public before going to Mars would be bad for the company.
Are private markets tapped out on cash to fund SpaceX ambitions? Elon Musk has been very clear about his feelings on publicly traded companies. Specifically: He doesn’t like them!
Read Article >