Statistics > Machine Learning
Title:On Rate-Optimal Partitioning Classification from Observable and from Privatised Data
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In this paper we revisit the classical method of partitioning classification and prove novel convergence rates under relaxed conditions, both for observable (non-privatised) and for privatised data. We consider the problem of classification in a $d$ dimensional Euclidean space. Previous results on the partitioning classifier worked with the strong density assumption (SDA), which is restrictive, as we demonstrate through simple examples. Here, we study the problem under much milder assumptions. We presuppose that the distribution of the inputs is a mixture of an absolutely continuous and a discrete distribution, such that the absolutely continuous component is concentrated on a $d_a$ dimensional subspace. In addition to the standard Lipschitz and margin conditions, a novel characteristic of the absolutely continuous component is introduced, by which the convergence rate of the classification error probability is computed, both for the binary and for the multi-class cases. This bound can reach the minimax optimal convergence rate achievable using SDA, but under much milder distributional assumptions. Interestingly, this convergence rate depends only on the intrinsic dimension of the continuous inputs, $d_a$, and not on $d$. Under privacy constraints, the data cannot be directly observed, and the constructed classifiers are functions of the randomised outcome of a suitable local differential privacy mechanism. In this paper we add Laplace distributed noises to the discretisations of all possible locations of the feature vector and to its label. Again, tight upper bounds on the convergence rate of the classification error probability can be derived, without using SDA, such that this rate depends on $2d_a$.
Submission history
From: Balázs Csanád Csáji [view email][v1] Fri, 22 Dec 2023 18:07:18 UTC (13 KB)
[v2] Thu, 29 Feb 2024 22:41:23 UTC (49 KB)
[v3] Fri, 5 Sep 2025 20:05:12 UTC (53 KB)
[v4] Thu, 11 Jun 2026 19:26:03 UTC (37 KB)
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.