Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:One Image is All You Need: Agentic One-Shot Image Generation via Text-Based World Models for Long-Tail Spatial Perception
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Reliable spatial decision automation, such as autonomous driving and maritime surveillance, critically depends on robust visual perception. However, real-world spatiotemporal data exhibits severe heterogeneity, often manifesting as extreme long-tail distributions for safety-critical scenarios. This data scarcity induces dataset shift that degrades detection performance and pose safety risks. While synthetic data generation offers a potential solution, existing generative approaches, such as diffusion models and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), often lack explicit spatial grounding and structural constraints, resulting in spatial and physical inconsistencies in generated scenes. To address these challenges, we introduce WMGen-v1, an agentic text-based world model framework for long-tail spatial data generation. WMGen-v1 employs a Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) to construct a structured scene representation from a single reference image, while a Large Language Model (LLM) performs guidance-based scene expansion under physical plausibility and commonsense constraints. Subsequently, conditioned on the structured semantic representations produced by this reasoning process, a diffusion model generates diverse and physically grounded long-tail training data. Experiments on internal industrial datasets, ROADWork, and LaRS benchmarks demonstrate that WMGen-v1 outperforms baseline approaches. Notably, detectors trained solely on WMGen-v1 synthetic data approach real-only performance on aggregate dataset-level metrics, highlighting its potential to alleviate long-tail data scarcity for downstream spatial perception.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.