Shares of SpaceX closed up 19% on Friday as Elon Musk’s space exploration company made its market debut on the Nasdaq in the largest IPO in history. The stock closed at $161.11 after opening at $150, giving the company a market cap of $2.1 trillion at the end of its first day of trading.
The IPO caps a remarkable journey for a company that raised nearly $12 billion in private investment since its founding in 2002 to become the world’s most valuable venture-backed startup with a most recent private-market valuation of $1.25 trillion. Along the way, SpaceX helped redefine both the space industry and the late-stage venture market.
Its long-awaited offering raised some $75 billion and served as an enormous liquidity event for Musk, who became the world’s first trillionaire as a result, as well as his close friend and confidant Antonio Gracias of Valor Equity Partners, who reportedly now owns a stake valued at more than $68 billion in SpaceX. It’s also a massive and successful exit for early venture and corporate investors including Google, Andreessen Horowitz, Sequoia Capital, Craft Ventures and Founders Fund.
SpaceX’s offering was unconventional along several fronts. Along with the IPO’s record-breaking nature — more than 10x larger than Facebook’s $104 billion offering in 2012 — the company also defied convention by setting a fixed price of $135 per share, rather than the traditional approach whereby investors and bookbuilders determine a range based on demand.
Hawthorne, California-based SpaceX is also wildly unprofitable. The company posted a net loss of $4.28 billion in the first quarter of 2026, up more than 700% from a year ago. Revenue totaled $4.69 billion in Q1, up 15% from a year ago. Its megacap valuation means it’s slated to trade at an aggressive premium of 94x revenue.
The SpaceX offering is the first in a lineup of at least three historic IPOs this year, with generative AI giants Anthropic and OpenAI openly racing to make it to the public markets in coming months. Altogether, the three IPOs transfer some $3 trillion in value from the private to public markets.
Related Crunchbase query:
Related reading:
- The SpaceX IPO Filing Looks Nothing Like Those Of The Elite Group Of Tech Giants It’s Hoping To Join
- SpaceX IPO At $1.5T Valuation Would Be 10x Larger Than Biggest VC-Backed Listing Of All Time
- Before You Cheer The IPO Window, Watch Where The Money Goes
Illustration: Dom Guzman
Stay up to date with recent funding rounds, acquisitions, and more with the Crunchbase Daily.