Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge, especially the purple category. And you're going to see a lot of deodorant names, but of course, the editors would never make it that easy. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Pure things.
Green group hint: Don't tell.
Blue group hint: Characters set slightly above a normal line of text.
Purple group hint: Terms musicians might use.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Symbols of innocence.
Green group: Things you're not supposed to reveal.
Blue group: Things represented in superscript.
Purple group: Slang for musical instruments.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is symbols of innocence. The four answers are angel, babe, dove and lamb.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is things you're not supposed to reveal. The four answers are password, secret, spoiler and surprise.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is things represented in superscript. The four answers are asterisk, degree, exponent and trademark.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is slang for musical instruments. The four answers are axe, bone, keys and skins.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.