Statistics > Machine Learning
Title:Scalable Bayesian Additive Models for Stellar Flare Detection via Amortized Gaussian Process Inference and Hidden Markov Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Gaussian Processes (GPs) are a powerful tool for Bayesian time-series modeling, yet their cubic computational cost remains a severe barrier for application to long, high-cadence datasets in astronomy. While specialized scalable solvers like Celerite elegantly reduce this scaling to linear time, repeatedly evaluating the exact likelihood during iterative Bayesian sampling is a bottleneck for developing more complex models, like hierarchical or additive models in which Celerite is only one component. To make this inference computationally tractable, we introduce a generative surrogate framework. By utilizing a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) to learn a compressed representation of the Celerite prior, we map highly correlated stochastic dependencies into a low-dimensional, isotropic manifold. This transition completely bypasses exact covariance operations, shifting the computational burden to a rapid neural network forward pass. Through an extensive simulation study, we show that the generative surrogate accurately reproduces the structural fidelity of exact physical kernels like Celerite. Finally, we demonstrate embedding our VAE approximation into an additive model that combines Celerite and a hidden Markov model (HMM) for stellar flare detection in time series data of stars. We evaluate the joint VAE+HMM architecture against the exact Celerite+HMM framework on empirical astrophysical time series and demonstrate that the proposed methodology achieves significant reductions in computational time, enabling the rigorous, large-scale characterization of stellar flares across massive data archives.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.