As I expand my writing career, it’s becoming increasingly apparent that I need to make a business website to showcase my talent and present my past projects. The problem is, although I love testing gadgets for WIRED, I’m definitely not a coder. Figuring out where to begin when building a website is daunting. How do I know the host is legit? How can I ensure my site is user-friendly? How much are annual costs, really? All of these questions and more have stopped me from taking the plunge and building my own website. That’s where Hostinger steps in to help.
For more than 20 years, Hostinger has made its reputation as a reliable, budget website-building and hosting option that is easy to create and navigate for beginners and small businesses. Its business has withstood massive changes to the internet because of its reliable, fast performance and 24/7 support. If you’re just getting your website started like me, we want to make taking the plunge easier with a Hostinger domain coupon. Plus, we also have a range of Hostinger coupons and various Hostinger promo codes for discounts on nearly all web hosting situations and needs.
Hostinger Coupon Code: 79% Off Hostinger Business Plan
The Hostinger Business hosting plan is likely the best plan for a small business and a good choice for small biz owners—and it’s 79% off right now. It has more tools available for everything your business needs to grow, with the ability to create up to 50 websites, five included “vibe coding credits” (more on that below), 50 GB of fast storage, five mailboxes per website (free for one year), and five managed Node.js web apps. Plus, with this advanced tier, you can get even more in-depth tools to get your website up and running. This includes backups to prevent any data loss, AI e-commerce help and an AI agent for WordPress to get your WP site ready in minutes. The Business plan is regularly $18 per month, but now it’s only $4 per month, along with three months free.
Get 75% Off the Premium Plans Using Hostinger Coupon
Hostinger works like many other online services in a subscription tier plan—the Hostinger Premium web hosting plan is the lowest-tier option that will fit most people, including me, who just need a basic, pared-down service to get started. This service is regularly $12 per month but is now at a 75% discount, bringing it down to just $3 per month—plus three months for free when you sign up. With Premium, you can create up to 3 websites, get five coding credits, 20 GB of storage, and two mailboxes per website (free for one year). On top of that, you’ll also get your domain free for one year, a super-easy drag-and-drop website builder, free SSL, weekly auto backups, and free email marketing for a year. Grab the Hostinger promo code for 75% off this basic plan that’s best for most individuals.
Save 71% on Cloud Startup With the Best Hostinger Discount
Cloud Startup is the highest tier of the three Hostinger web hosting plans, with 20 times more power for all your website needs with Cloud hosting. It’s now 71% off with a Hostinger coupon, making the expansive service only $8 per month, with three months free—$20 less per month when regularly priced. With this top-tier service, you’ll get all that you get in previous tiers, but with the ability to create up to 100 websites, 100 GB of fast storage, 10 mailboxes per website (free for one year), and 10 managed web apps. Plus, with this top-tier plan tailored for startup businesses with Cloud storage, you’ll also get priority 24/7 support, power boost for a week per month for peak traffic times, a dedicated IP address, 100 PHP workers for busy sites, 2M inodes to scale your files, and included 4 GB RAM for extra-smooth site performance. Be sure to snag this Hostinger discount for 71% off a Cloud Startup plan.
Unlock 30% Off With Our Hostinger Promo Code
Hostinger can help your website match the overall vibe of the business or feel that you’re trying to create, and they call it your “vibe code.” Hostinger’s AI tools like Hostinger Horizons help AI generate a design similar to the vision you have for your website. With this tool, you can even get a visual mockup of a website with a specific vibe you’ve inputted. The most popular plan of this “vibe code” website and builder is the Starter plan. With this mid-tier plan, you have a 30-day money-back guarantee, 24/7 support, and no-contract cancellation. With a 12-month plan, it’s 30% off—$5 less per month with this Hostinger promo code. With this Starter plan, you’ll get your free domain for one year, two free mailboxes per website for one year, and everything in the previous Explorer tier. Plus, you’ll have the ability to: create up to 25 websites, sell subscriptions, add chatbots and other AI features, sell physical and digital products, track visitors with included analytics, and more text and image editing features.
Hostinger Student Discount: 25% Off
If you’re a student who’s in need of a website to show off your marketable skills or a place to get that startup off the ground, Hostinger wants to make it easier to make your dreams a reality. All you need to do to get a Hostinger student discount of 25% off, is to verify your student status through Student Beans to unlock the exclusive 25% Hostinger discount. (Offer is only valid for new users).
Use Hostinger Email Services for Business
Here on the WIRED Reviews team, I also dab in sending newsletters and I’ve seen firsthand how valuable email newsletters and marketing can be to grow your business and improve your relationship with both potential and established customers. Hostinger has valuable email services for business, including AI that handles email marketing, from launching newsletters to building layouts and writing copy. Plus, the AI will apply your brand to them, along with giving weekly campaign ideas based on your business, audience, and season. You can start for free and you have a 30-day money-back guarantee if you find that the AI email service isn’t right for your business.
Free Trial to Vibe Code Your Website
As mentioned above, Hostinger allows you to “vibe code” your website or app—all you have to do is describe what you want and Horizons builds it for you. This is great for beginners or those without prior experience, you don’t need to know how to code, and don’t need tech skills; you can launch it all in just one click. With Horizons from Hostinger, you can build AI-powered web apps in a click. You just need to describe your idea or pick a template, and the AI will build your vision for you. AI can edit almost anything, from text and design, to functionality. But you don’t have to compromise, with the ability to edit texts and images yourself as a content editor. To get started, just pick a professionally designed template, customize it with AI or visual edits, and whether you’re in the e-commerce space, need a portfolio, or want to showcase business and services, Hostinger makes it easy.