If you like to get your teeth professionally whitened or want options to use at home, there are plenty of products to choose from. Your local pharmacy is your best bet to find teeth-whitening kits or whitening toothpastes. Dentist Dr. Sandip Sachar says that although these products work, it may take time to see results. "It should be noted that while whitening toothpastes can help remove surface stains and maintain brightness, they have limitations -- most won’t change the natural color of your teeth or treat deep discoloration," Sachar says.
Here's what dentists have to say about the best whitening toothpastes on the market and which are worth purchasing. They've named everything from toothpastes they recommend to their patients for sensitive teeth, daily use and more.
What is the best whitening toothpaste overall?
We didn't choose a single best whitening toothpaste because the best option can differ based on individual preferences and needs. Below, we have listed various types of whitening toothpaste based on dentist recommendations. However, if you have any questions, it's best to consult your dentist for personalized advice.
Best whitening toothpaste of 2026
- Contains 5% hydrogen peroxide, which whitens intrinsically and extrinsically
- Formula may be too strong or cause irritation for some
Why we like it: Colgate Optic White Pro Series toothpaste is one of the whitening toothpastes Dr. Fatima Khan, a dentist in Houston, Texas, recommends. Some of her reasons for recommending it include its trusted brand name and its 5% hydrogen peroxide whitening agent. Unlike other whitening agents that work by removing surface stains, hydrogen peroxide can penetrate the tooth, so it whitens intrinsically as well as extrinsically.
Sachar also recommends this toothpaste, saying, "Colgate Optic White Pro Series is the strongest professional-level whitening toothpaste on the market and would be my pick. Its 5% hydrogen peroxide content is the most effective bleaching agent in an OTC toothpaste, delivering visible results fast." However, she recommends patients use it with care and alternate it with a non-whitening or enamel-repairing toothpaste periodically.
Who is it best for: Optic White Pro Series is best for anyone who is looking for a whitening toothpaste that contains both hydrogen peroxide and fluoride.
Who should not get it: According to Khan, one downside to this toothpaste is that it contains sodium lauryl sulfate, which may cause irritation, such as canker sores. Other popular whitening toothpastes may also contain SLS, so it's important to check the ingredients before you buy if you're sensitive to it.
"It may not be ideal for sensitive teeth or continuous long-term use without alternating with a non-whitening toothpaste," adds Sachar. "I recommend this one for short-term use or occasional whitening boosts. I tell my patients to use it for short periods of time and alternate it with a non-whitening or enamel-repairing toothpaste periodically."
- Contains low-abrasion silica and hydrogen peroxide for whitening
- Has fluoride for cavity protection
- Designed to strengthen enamel
- Slightly more expensive than other toothpastes at $9
- Not for those with severe sensitivity
Why we like it: Sachar recommends this toothpaste for daily use and surface stain prevention because it "uses 4% hydrogen peroxide, which is also potent for whitening, though slightly less than the Colgate Optic." It also offers more enamel-safe daily whitening, making it a better choice for long-term, daily use or for people with sensitive teeth.
Sachar likes that it contains low-abrasion silica and hydrogen peroxide for gentle yet noticeable whitening that doesn't over-strip enamel. It also contains fluoride for cavity protection and other enamel-strengthening ingredients.
Who is it best for: Sachar recommends 3D White Brilliance to coffee, tea or red wine drinkers who want to maintain a bright smile without aggressive bleaching. It would also be good for those with moderate sensitivity, people looking for post-whitening maintenance after an in-office procedure and those who want whitening without compromising daily cavity prevention or enamel health.
Who should not get it: When asked who should avoid this toothpaste, Sachar says, "Severe sensitivity sufferers (e.g., exposed root surfaces, gum recession or dentin hypersensitivity). The mild peroxide can still be irritating." She adds that if you're avoiding fluoride, this toothpaste wouldn't be right for you either.
- More affordable at $5
- Contains SLS like many toothpastes
Why we like it: Dr. Elizabeth Himel, owner of Aspen Dental, recommends Crest Pro-Health Advanced Extra Whitening toothpaste. This toothpaste whitens through hydrated silica, a mild abrasive. Crest is also a well-known brand with many products (quite a few of them marketed toward whitening), making this an approachable choice for many.
Who is it best for: Crest Pro-Health Advanced Extra Whitening would be best for anyone looking for an easy-to-find, affordable whitening toothpaste that contains hydrated silica and fluoride.
Who should not get it: This toothpaste contains SLS, so if you're sensitive to it, you'll want to steer clear.
- May be a better option for sensitive teeth
- More expensive than other products out there at around $7
Why we like it: Khan recommended Sensodyne Pronamel Gentle Whitening toothpaste due to its low abrasiveness compared to other products. Sensodyne is a brand many people with sensitive teeth may be familiar with. This particular whitening toothpaste is free from sodium lauryl sulfate, which can irritate many people's mouths. Sachar also recommends it for those with sensitive teeth.
Who is it best for: Pronamel Gentle Whitening would be best for anyone with sensitive teeth who is looking to avoid the ingredient SLS, but still wants fluoride.
Who should not get it: This whitening toothpaste is slightly more expensive at $7, so it may not be for someone who wants the most affordable whitening toothpaste.
- Contains natural ingredients, like coconut oil and essential oils
- Doesn't contain fluoride or hydroxyapatite, so probably not ideal for regular use
Why we like it: Lumineux whitening toothpaste is another toothpaste recommended by Khan. It contains essential oils and more “natural” ingredients like coconut oil and dead sea salt, making it a more appealing choice for some. According to Khan, it whitens with hydrated silica and has a more "medium" abrasiveness.
Who is it best for: This whitening toothpaste is best for people who want to avoid fluoride in favor of ingredients like coconut oil and essential oils. It also has a medium abrasiveness for anyone who is looking for something less intense than other whitening toothpastes out there.
Who should not get it: Since this toothpaste doesn't contain fluoride or hydroxyapatite for fighting cavities, it probably wouldn't be good for regular use -- especially for anyone who is prone to cavities.
- Remineralizes with nano-hydroxyapatite
- Doesn't contain fluoride
Why we like it: This toothpaste isn't as heavily marketed toward whitening as other products on this list, but it was highlighted by Khan because it's a good fluoride-free option for those looking for one, and it uses nano-hydroxyapatite to remineralize the teeth, which may brighten them as it works to help rebuild enamel.
Who is it best for: Boka Ela Mint n-Ha toothpaste is a good option for anyone who wants a fluoride-free whitening toothpaste that uses nano-hydroxyapatite.
Who should not get it: This toothpaste is more expensive than other options at $12. It also may not be a good option for those who are at high risk for cavities since fluoride is the gold standard.
- Uses nano‑hydroxyapatite for healthier enamel
- Good for those avoiding fluoride
- Not for those who want a fast multi-shade change
- More expensive than other toothpastes at $12
Why we like it: Dr. Christopher Tolmie, DDS, MBA, of PDS Health, recommends this whitening toothpaste, saying, "Instead of peroxide, it uses nano‑hydroxyapatite, the same calcium‑phosphate crystal your enamel is made of, to lift surface stains. Healthier enamel means fewer bacterial highways into the rest of your body."
Tolmie also cites a 2021 randomized clinical trial that found that 10 % hydroxyapatite protects against cavities as well as fluoride. "It polishes stains while filling micro‑cracks, smoothing, whitening and reducing sensitivity," adds Tolmie. "Expect a gentle 1-2‑shade lift in 2-4 weeks, versus a 3-8-shade jump in a single professional visit."
Dr. Yenile Pinto, DDS, founder of Deering Dental, also recommends this toothpaste for stronger, healthier enamel. "It strikes a great balance between cosmetic whitening and true functional benefit," she says.
"To me, the ideal whitening toothpaste helps remineralize enamel, balance pH and support your oral microbiome," Pinto explains. "Nano-hydroxyapatite does just that, and as it rebuilds the tooth’s surface, it naturally reduces transparency and helps teeth appear whiter without irritation or long-term damage. By smoothing and strengthening the outer layer, it also increases the tooth’s ability to reflect light, making your smile appear not only whiter, but more brilliant and vibrant."
Who is it best for: This toothpaste is best for "clean‑label and fluoride‑averse seekers, kids, pregnant patients or anyone wanting everyday whitening without the high sensitivity side effect risk," states Tolmie.
Pinto also recommends this toothpaste to patients with mild sensitivity, early enamel erosion or a history of cavities.
Who should not get it: Tolmie doesn't recommend this whitening toothpaste to heavy smokers, people with tetracycline stains or those who want a fast multi‑shade change. For patients who want the latter, he states that they will need custom trays or in‑office bleaching.
"I don’t recommend using whitening toothpastes or even gentler ones every single day long-term," adds Pinto. "Most contain a slight abrasive (often hydrated silica or baking soda), which is generally safe in moderation but can wear enamel over time if overused."
Best whitening toothpaste compared
| Toothpaste | Superlative | Main whitening agent | Contains sodium lauryl sulfate | Contains fluoride | Price |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Colgate Optic White Pro Series | Best whitening toothpaste with hydrogen peroxide | Hydrogen peroxide, 5% | Yes | Yes | $9 |
| Crest Pro-Health Advanced Extra Whitening toothpaste | Most affordable whitening toothpaste | Hydrated silica | Yes | Yes | $4 |
| Sensodyne Pronamel Gentle Whitening | Best whitening toothpaste for sensitive teeth | Hydrated silica | No | Yes | $7 |
| Lumineux Whitening toothpaste | Best whitening toothpaste with essential oils | Hydrated silica | No | No | $7 |
| Boka Ela Mint n-Ha toothpaste | Best natural whitening toothpaste | Hydrated silica | No | No | $12 |
| Crest 3D White Brilliance Pro Enamel Protect Toothpaste | Best whitening toothpaste for daily use | Hydrogen peroxide, 4% | Yes | Yes | $9 |
| RiseWell Mineral Toothpaste | Best natural, low‑abrasive whitening toothpaste | Hydroxyapatite | No | No | $12 |
Best whitening toothpaste FAQs
Is whitening toothpaste better for your teeth than whitening strips?
Not necessarily. Dr. Erin Fraundorf, founder of BOCA Orthodontic and Whitening Studio, said that while teeth whitening with a toothpaste can be "effective in the short term," overuse can lead to sensitivity and damage over time. Instead of whitening toothpaste, Fraundorf recommends seeing your dentist for in-office whitening, or choosing another home product such as whitening strips from Opalescence.
"Toothpaste will not give you the instant whitening results as whitening strips or in-office whitening because those contain a higher concentration of the hydrogen peroxide, and duration of the agent being on your teeth is longer compared to toothpaste," Khan also said.
Can I prevent my teeth from getting yellow?
It's important to keep in mind a little discoloration is normal and inevitable -- teeth may be white-ish in color, but that doesn't mean they have to be white white. It's also important to note that having white teeth doesn't necessarily mean your oral health is in tip-top shape.
That being said, there are some things you can do to minimize your teeth taking on a tint:
Stay on top of regular, professional cleanings. That's preferably twice a year, but at least once a year, and maybe more often, as they may effectively and safely remove some surface stains. Also, make sure your regular oral care routine is solid, complete with regular flossing and an electric toothbrush.
Swish with water after drinking coffee or wine. Fraundorf recommends taking a swish of flat water (not sparkling) between sips of coffee or wine, which are two major culprits of staining teeth. Drinking water often, and moving it around your mouth, will also help with the acidity of certain foods and beverages.
Chew sugar-free gum. Another suggestion from Fraundrof, as chewing sugar-free gum after meals has been shown to help reduce the likelihood of cavities.
Which is the strongest whitening toothpaste?
"While Colgate Optic White Pro Series offers the strongest whitening with 5% peroxide (the highest concentration legally available in over-the-counter toothpaste), it may not be ideal for sensitive teeth or continuous long-term use without alternating with a non-whitening toothpaste," explains Sachar. "I recommend this one for short-term use or occasional whitening boosts. I tell my patients to use it for short periods of time and alternate it with a non-whitening or enamel-repairing toothpaste periodically."