Statistics > Applications
Title:A Deep Zero-Inflated Model of North Atlantic Right Whale Presence To Support Blue Economy Management in the U.S. East Coast
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Effective modeling of endangered marine mammal species, such as the North Atlantic Right Whale, is critical for balancing marine conservation with the growing blue economy. Passive acoustic monitoring data collected by autonomous underwater vehicles provide new opportunities for localized marine species detection and oceanographic sensing, but introduce complex statistical challenges such as zero inflation, imperfect detection, and intricate dependence structures. In response, we propose the Deep Zero-Inflated Bernoulli (DeepZIB) model--a deep statistical method which jointly models latent species presence and conditional detection probabilities while learning complex habitat relationships from heterogeneous covariate information. We establish theoretical results on the model's structural properties and conduct simulation experiments to demonstrate its ability to recover underlying parameters and latent presence fields. Application to real-world passive acoustic monitoring data on the North Atlantic Right Whale along the U.S. East Coast demonstrates improved model adequacy and predictive performance in capturing the species' dynamic and spatially varying habitat. A key advantage of DeepZIB is its ability to generate high-resolution, spatially and temporally varying presence maps, providing valuable insights for targeted and risk-aware management of blue economy industries, ranging from offshore and marine energy, to fisheries management and maritime transport.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.