Featured in this article
Before I started using a handheld fan, I was a total skeptic. I’d seen the ones that attach to your phone or fit in a bag, and I couldn’t imagine they’d provide any real relief from the heat—and they seemed completely unnecessary. But now that I’ve used the fans on this list, I don’t know how I was functioning without them.
There are certain scenarios where having a portable fan makes your life so much better: Outdoor concerts, weddings, festivals, amusement parks, sporting events, backyard parties. I don’t live in New York City anymore, but I could imagine having one of these on the subway would be a game changer. Despite their size, they do actually create a significant breeze—in some cases, it’s enough to stop you from getting sticky, shiny, and sweaty. If you want to make it through a ridiculously hot day without your makeup melting or pitting out, you need one of these handheld fans.
For more ways to stay cool, check out our guides to the Best Fans and the Best Window ACs.
Updated June 2026: We've added new fans from Dyson, Shark, and Aecooly, removed discontinued fans, and ensured up-to-date links and prices.
Others Tested
Shark ChillPill 3-in-1 Personal Cooling System for $150: New this year, Shark's first entry into the handheld fan market looks like two stacked cylinders—one the controller, the other a tube that can variably be a regular fan, a refillable misting fan, or a metal cryo-inspired cold plate you can press to your neck or pulse points. The latter is a super-unique feature that I love, but I didn't like that you have to swap out separate attachments for each function (and carry them around in a bag if you're traveling). It's a little awkward to hold, and it also does not come with a lanyard or an easy way to carry it, which one might expect at this price point. It does, however, come in seven cool anodized-metal colors.
Dyson HushJet Mini Cool for $100: With so many decent portable hand fans on the market for around $20, I'd expect great things from a fan costing $100 or more, and while this one is fine (aside from a resemblance to—I'm sorry to have to say—a worm anus), the windspeed and overall performance were only marginally better than the cheaper fans. I do like that it comes with a stand for use on a desk, though, as well as the ribbon lanyard for wearing around your neck. It also gets points for not producing a high-pitched jet-engine whine like the similarly priced Ultra2 fan above, but its performance and features are otherwise subpar in comparison.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.