Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:UniVoice: Unifying Autoregressive ASR and Flow-Matching based TTS with Large Language Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated promising performance in both automatic speech recognition (ASR) and text-to-speech (TTS) systems, gradually becoming the mainstream approach. However, most current approaches address these tasks separately rather than through a unified framework. This work aims to integrate these two tasks into one unified model. Although discrete speech tokenization enables joint modeling, its inherent information loss limits performance in both recognition and generation. In this work, we present UniVoice, a unified LLM framework through continuous representations that seamlessly integrates speech recognition and synthesis within a single model. Our approach combines the strengths of autoregressive modeling for speech recognition with flow matching for high-quality generation. To mitigate the inherent divergence between autoregressive and flow-matching models, we further design a dual attention mechanism, which switches between a causal mask for recognition and a bidirectional attention mask for synthesis. Furthermore, the proposed text-prefix-conditioned speech infilling method enables high-fidelity zero-shot voice cloning. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can achieve or exceed current single-task modeling methods in both ASR and zero-shot TTS tasks. This work explores new possibilities for end-to-end speech understanding and generation. Code is available at this https URL.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.