I won't play the bitter "Android did it first" game. But I will say that after seeing the slew of AI features Apple unveiled at WWDC on Monday, I'm glad iOS 27 is getting some supercharged capabilities that are on par with what Android has offered for years.
Updates to Apple Intelligence and Siri -- partly powered by Google's Gemini models -- push smartphones deeper into the AI-first era, where smart assistants can start to fulfill their long-promised potential.
Siri AI, which finally arrives two years after Apple first announced a Siri revamp, can now handle more complex and multi-step tasks. The company says its improved assistant can understand the context of what's on your screen, pull up relevant information across various apps and carry out a more natural back-and-forth conversation. It's designed to feel seamless, practical and actually helpful. No more vague "I found this on the web" replies (hopefully).
Siri AI will be able to find the exact photos someone texts you about, or dig up a flight confirmation number from your email when you're on the phone with an airline. These features echo Google's Magic Cue and Samsung's Galaxy AI, which can also surface relevant information across apps automatically.
"We believe that truly helpful AI must be centered around you and your needs," Craig Federighi, Apple's senior vice president of software engineering, said during the keynote. "This means integrating AI deep into the products you use every day, grounding it in your personal context and the apps you rely on. And of course, designing it with privacy at every step."
The upgraded Siri -- along with a host of other Apple Intelligence updates across iPhone, iPad, Mac and Vision Pro -- comes on the heels of Google's I/O developer conference last month. Google unveiled a suite of its own AI-powered updates called Gemini Intelligence, which bakes AI even deeper into Android. Gemini can now fill out forms, schedule appointments and make reservations for you.
In fact, Google proclaimed that Android was evolving from an "operating system" into an "intelligence system" -- a marketing phrase I personally will not be adopting. But the message was clear: Smartphones, along with other hardware products, are increasingly being redefined around AI. And the updates at this year's WWDC reinforce that overall vision.
Balancing trust and utility
Accepting this AI-driven future involves ceding some control -- a tradeoff that won't appeal to everyone. It can be a little unsettling to think about Gemini booking a flight or Apple Intelligence changing your passwords to more secure ones in Safari, for example. Some tasks just feel a little too personal.
Personally, my trepidation is outweighed by the appeal of letting AI agents do the grunt work. Both Apple and Google have made user privacy a more prominent part of their keynotes and product reveals. Whether that's enough assurance will vary from person to person. But the way I see it, if my personal information is already deeply embedded across Google's and Apple's ecosystems, I might as well use on-device AI to make finding that information a little easier.
"Apple is trying to make AI feel native, useful and invisible across the devices people already use every day," Francisco Jeronimo, vice president of client devices at IDC, said in a statement. "The winning AI experience for consumers will not be the loudest or most technically complex. It will be the one that understands context, respects privacy, works reliably across apps and reduces friction without forcing users to change behavior."
Apple's AI-heavy announcements arrived as patience was wearing thin among some consumers. Last month, Apple agreed to pay $250 million to settle claims that it misled consumers about Apple Intelligence and a smarter Siri on the iPhone 16. The gulf between what iPhones and premium Android phones can do only widened with each successive release and software update.
Monday's AI announcements didn't necessarily put Apple ahead, but they may have stopped the company from falling further behind. And, as long as Siri AI makes its appearance later this year and does what Apple is promising, the company may finally persuade critics that it does have a clear AI strategy.
"I think Apple will convince the only skeptics that really matter -- it's customers and prospects who may be getting their AI fix elsewhere -- so long as they deliver what they have promised, and in short order," Dipanjan Chatterjee, vice president and principal analyst at Forrester, said in a statement.
After years of AI feeling like a fragmented collection of gimmicks, both Apple and Google are now seemingly moving toward the same goal: turning our phones into self-driven tools that actually get things done.
If Siri AI delivers, the big takeaway from WWDC won't be that Apple caught up to Android; it may be that the AI smartphone era is finally just around the corner.