Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Can neurons speak? Semantic narration of vision at single-cell resolution
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Identifying what individual neurons encode in higher-order visual cortex is an open problem. Responses resist intuitive parameterization, and the deep-network embeddings used in their place are black boxes. Here, we introduce NEURRATOR, a framework that decodes spiking activity into free-form natural-language narration of the viewed scene at single-neuron resolution. A learned encoder maps spike trains from arbitrary subsets of simultaneously-recorded neurons into the patch-embedding space of a frozen CLIP, from which a multimodal language model and sparse autoencoder generates and validates a description with no language-side training. Applied to Neuropixel recordings of mouse visual cortex during natural-movie viewing, NEURRATOR narrates from thousands of neurons, singular cortical regions, local populations, or from a molecularly-defined cell-types. We use this property to (i) quantify how decoding fidelity scales with population size and cortical region, and (ii) "neurrate", in plain language, what individual neurons and genetically-tagged inhibitory cell-types contribute to visual representation. This recasts cell identity from a classification target into a functional probe of the visual system, providing a new unit of biological insights in neural systems.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.