Verizon customers looking for reasons to stick with the carrier have a new weekly incentive. Verizon Shine -- say it out loud to kickstart a slow morning -- features discounts from partner companies, a new Verizon Dollars credit program and opportunities to win big-ticket items like breakfast with football legend David Beckham at the World Cup finals.
Verizon Shine is available now to all subscribers of Verizon's postpaid unlimited plans. Customers can opt-in to the program in the My Verizon app on their phones.
Mondays will bring daily drops of deals and products, such as free coffee from Starbucks and FIFA World Cup 2026 merch. Verizon says other examples of drops can include concert and sporting event tickets, dining vouchers and gift cards. This sounds strikingly similar to the T-Mobile Tuesdays weekly perk giveaways that Verizon's rival carrier used to win over subscribers, especially in its early years.
"What we're looking to do is to break some of the norms that are in the industry overall and put customers first," said Nancy Clark, Verizon's chief product and revenue officer.
One of those norms is charging activation and upgrading fees when adding or upgrading lines. For people on the loyalty program, Verizon will waive those changes, including for connected device plans. The company currently charges $40 for an activation.
Verizon Dollars
Verizon Shine also introduces Verizon Dollars, which are accrued each month at a rate of 3% of your bill (not including taxes and fees). Subscribers will be able to access Verizon Dollars starting in July.
Those loyalty bucks can be used toward purchasing items from partners such as Sephora, Roblox, Hilton, Marriott and Starbucks. Clark said the program is launching with approximately 40 partners and will expand in the future.
You can't apply Verizon Dollars to reduce your bill, but you can use them for buying accessories through Verizon, such as phone cases or put them toward a new phone or other device. The dollars can be banked for 12 months.
Although Verizon operates physical retail stores, the Verizon Shine benefits won't involve locating your nearest location to score merch. If you redeem a physical item, it will be sent to you.
Clark also noted that Verizon Dollars aren't necessarily a one-for-one transfer. For example, one Verizon Dollar could get up to five times its value from a partner such as a hotel.
Breakfast like (and with) Beckham
In addition to daily drops, each Monday will bring the chance to win bigger experiences. For instance, on June 22, some lucky Verizon customers will be chosen to have breakfast with David Beckham (footballer and Verizon ambassador) as part of a three-day trip to see the World Cup final on July 19. A New York City food tour with chef Andrew Zimmern drops July 6.
Other top-ticket events include a meet-and-greet with musician Young Miko, a holiday dance lesson with the Rockettes at Radio City Music Hall, and trips to watch NFL games -- the other football -- in France and Australia.