If you have a hard time remembering to reapply sunscreen or are worried about sun damage, a new piece of smart jewelry may be the answer. On Thursday, The90, a preventive skin health wearable company, launched The90 Gem, a pendant necklace with a sensor that reads real-time UVA and UVB exposure.
UVA rays can contribute to long-term skin aging and increase the risk of skin cancer. UVB rays can cause sunburns, but both types of ultraviolet radiation can damage the skin over time.
The90 was founded by Stacy Salvi, who previously led the acquisition of Fitbit by Google and is an expert in health tech wearables. Salvi wanted to help women have more control over their sun exposure data, which is one of the key factors in maintaining healthy skin free of sun damage.
A The90 spokesperson told CNET that the necklace was designed with women in mind because the company's research found that this demographic tends to already be knowledgeable about sun protection. "We found that women are both the most familiar with the benefits and risks of UV exposure and the most interested in finding ways to mitigate those risks," they said. However, The90 plans to expand its product line in the future to serve men and children as well.
"The90 transforms sunscreen from a one-time morning ritual into an adaptive, responsive system built around your actual UV load," Salvi said in a press release.
The necklace's pendant collects UVA and UVB data, recognizes your skin profile and sunscreen use and whether you're wearing protective clothing. The idea is to help women become more aware and receive actionable reminders about their sun exposure, sunscreen application timing and healthy skin aging.
"Women are already investing in SPF, treatments, tools and routines to protect their skin, but when it comes to sun exposure, most of us are still guessing," said entrepreneur Lauryn Bosstick, one of The90's investors and podcast host and founder of The Skinny Confidential, in the press release.
The90 Gem syncs with the The90 app on your phone and has you set up a personalized skin type profile. You'll identify your skin type, your daily sunscreen use and other sun protection habits.
Besides detecting UVA and UVB rays, The90 will send you sunscreen reapplication reminders, personalized guidelines on limiting UV exposure and other features based on real-time readings and your needs.
The90 Gem is available now for $299, but there's an exclusive deal for $199 for The Skinny Confidential community.