Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Bridging the SEA Gap: An Initial Benchmark for Neural Audio Codec-Synthesized Speech Deepfakes in South-East Asian Languages
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Codecfakes (CFs) are a type of speech deepfakes generated through Audio Language Models (ALMs), with Neural Audio Codecs (NACs) forming the core mechanism for speech encoding and generation. CFs exhibit distributional characteristics that differ from vocoder-based deepfakes, causing detectors trained on vocoder data to generalize poorly to CFs detection. Although this has led to the development of CF detection benchmarks, existing resources are largely confined to English -- and to a limited extent Chinese -- leaving South-East Asian (SEA) languages unexplored. To bridge this gap, we introduce SEA-CF, the first large-scale benchmark for CF detection spanning multiple SEA languages, diverse speaker profiles, and a wide range of NAC architectures. SEA-CF is constructed by synthesizing publicly available real speech corpora. Our experiments show that state-of-the-art (SOTA) CF detectors trained on English-centric datasets fail to generalize to SEA speech due to language-specific phonetic structures, tonal variations, and rich prosodic diversity. We further conduct a comprehensive zero-shot and fine-tuned evaluation of recent SOTA ALMs on SEA-CF. Fine-tuning the ALMs improves performance, however, these are very large being impractical for real-world application due to their scale, particularly in low-resource and latency-constrained settings. To address this limitation, we propose a novel small-ALM, GARUDA tailored for CF detection, which delivers strong performance while remaining lightweight. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that the proposed Small-ALM outperforms strong end-to-end and ALM-based baselines, establishing a new, practical direction for robust CF detection in SEA languages and beyond.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.