Aside from Apple, everybody seems to be doing clip-on earbuds these days, including Sennheiser. The company just announced its Accentum Clip buds, set to ship on July 23 in black or white. But the only rub is they won't be coming to the US on that date, and it's unclear when they'll hit US retailers. However, Sennheiser says Canadians will be able to pick them up for $270 Canadian (roughly $190).
Read More: Best Wireless Earbuds of 2026
I am curious to hear how they sound compared to other leading clip-on buds, which are not only becoming more comfortable and better designed, but are delivering better performance compared to early clip-on models. The Sennheiser Clip are equipped with 12-millimeter drivers, Bluetooth 6.0, have support for the LDAC audio codec for Android users (along with AAC for Apple users) and are rated for 9 hours of battery life on a single charge with an additional 27 hours in the charging case. They're splashproof and dust-resistant with an IP54 rating and weigh 6.8 grams per bud.
Sennheiser says the Accentum Clip are "tuned for clarity and punchy bass with smooth treble" and the earbuds use dynamic EQ for "seamless compensation of tonal shifts" when playback volume is raised and lowered "to maintain balance while preventing unpleasant distortion."
If the Canadian price is any indication, I suspect the Accentum Clip will cost around $200 when they final make it stateside. That's toward the premium end of the clip-on earbuds spectrum, with Sony's LinkBuds Clip and Shokz OpenDots One in a similar price range. Bose's Ultra Open Buds, which list for $300, are currently being discounted to $200.
If you're looking for value clip-on options, Baseus sells its new Bowie MC2 buds for around $60 on Amazon. I like them a lot for what they cost. The Baseus Inspire XC1 buds, which feature Sound by Bose, are also a decent value at $110.
Check out my list of the best clip-on earbuds for other options in this nascent earbuds subcategory. Maybe these new Sennheiser Accentum Clip buds make the list once I get a chance to test them. Hopefully, that'll happen in the not-so-distant future and not require a trip abroad.