Computer Science > Robotics
Title:MAGNIFIED: RL Fine-tuning of Multimodal Large Language Models for Motion Planning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in semantic understanding and common sense reasoning, making them promising candidates for solving planning problems in autonomous driving. However, the next-token text prediction objectives traditionally used in pre-training and supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of MLLMs may fall short of fulfilling the planning objectives for autonomous vehicles. The next-token prediction objective merely encourages per-token imitation in text, often irrespective of multi-step consequences and the alignment with crucial planning considerations such as giving space to other road actors. To overcome these limitations, we propose a reinforcement learning fine-tuning (RLFT) approach, MAGNIFIED, that aligns the MLLM-based driving agent with planning objectives by learning from token-level rewards. By mapping a sequence of predicted tokens to corresponding vehicle trajectories and learning from planning rewards, MAGNIFIED optimizes for the true planning objectives rather than focusing solely on token prediction accuracy, enabling the model to refine its understanding of the planning task beyond simple imitation. We validate our approach on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset with a novel setup incorporating rasterized birds-eye views and tokenized trajectories as inputs and planning-oriented outputs. An initial SFT phase establishes a strong baseline in outputting plan trajectories as sequences of X-Y coordinates in text, while subsequent RL fine-tuning substantially enhances planning performance relative to the SFT baseline (demonstrating over a 10.5% reduction in overlap rate and a 38.9% reduction in off-road rate), underscoring the potential of RLFT on MLLMs to achieve vehicle planning that is better aligned with compliant, comfortable, and efficient driving.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.