On the Netflix show Legends, AI processing was used to enhance a dimly lit office scene to bring up the contrast. I had a similar experience watching scenes from Awake on Netflix, which takes place mostly at night. I could still see the main characters even in darker areas of the scene. YouTube videos of WIRED interviews looked clear and colorful as well. In comparison, low-cost televisions seem more like a computer display with stark bright colors playing the same clips.
Samsung also leveraged AI to improve sound quality. In time for the World Cup, Samsung’s new AI audio feature helps enhance the volume of the broadcaster voices while lowering distracting crowd noises when watching soccer matches. For movies, the AI Sound Controller Pro sliders can help boost voices and reduce the volume of background music, but the experience is still buggy. While I could adjust the sliders, they’d always revert back to the default settings. Still, with Dolby Atmos support, I found myself immersed in the experience as audio emanated from around the room when watching Unbroken.
There were also several glitches I’ve noticed in testing. AirPlay worked fine, but when trying to use Google Cast to stream Alien: Romulus on HBO Max from my Android phone, an error occurred. Cloud gaming on GeForce NOW also presented with a bug that prevented me from authenticating with the service. Samsung reps are looking into these issues.
Despite the bugs, I’m convinced that The Frame Pro is a capable gaming display. Gamers looking to connect a console or gaming PC can use the Mini HDMI port on the rear of the television or the Wireless One Connect box. Both support refresh rates up to 240 Hz. I’m not a competitive gamer, so I stuck with the breakout box to connect my PC. I was amazed at Crimson Desert’s stutter-free performance. Everything looked rich and vibrant—there were also no delays using an Xbox controller.
I also tested the Aphelion using the Xbox Cloud Gaming app for console-free gaming. Other than slight stuttering due to lag, it all worked fine. Senua's Saga: Hellblade II, a game that typically looks washed out on some competing TVs and projectors, appears vibrant on the screen.
The Frame Pro 2026 is an exceptional art television, and it’s among the best I’ve tested. Improvements to the Tizen OS, matte finish with anti-glare coating, and AI enhancements make it even more appealing. My only slight pause is the price. The Amazon Ember Artline also looks stunning and costs about $900 less. But The Frame Pro is the one you want for absolute realism and vivid colors.