Computer Science > Robotics
Title:A Modular Dual-Arm Apple Harvesting Robot with Enhanced Field Performance
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Robotic apple harvesting offers a promising solution to labor shortages in commercial orchards, but low throughput and poor performance in orchard environments hinder its commercial adoption. This paper presents a modular dual-arm apple harvesting robot that uses a vertically stacked arms to enable simultaneous operation in the upper and lower zones of a single tree, simplifying platform positioning from multi-tree lateral repositioning to single-tree stops. Compared to our prior horizontal dual-arm system, the platform integrates 5 advances: (1)a foundation-model-based perception pipeline combining Grounding-DINO and EfficientViT-SAM for robust fruit localization in unstructured outdoor environments; (2)7th-order jerk-bounded trajectory generation paired with a Control Barrier Function safety filter to achieve fast yet safe arm motions; (3)a linear sweep harvesting strategy with a 10cm approach buffer and rotational detachment that improves picking reliability; (4)a temporal-logic-based dual-arm coordination policy with vision-arm async scheduling that maximizes usage of a shared vacuum source; and (5)field validation in 2 commercial orchards covering different apple varieties and tree architectures during the 2025 harvest season. Across the 1738 arm cycles collected in these field trials, the system achieved an 80.0% per-attempt success rate and a mean per-arm cycle time of 7.53s. Fruit damage assessments confirmed that 91.2% of robotically harvested fruit retained the highest USDA grade (Extra Fancy), with bruise rates between 2.4% and 4.9%. With further improvements in the picking cycle time and handling of heavy foliage occlusions, this new modular robot design holds promise for commercial harvesting of apples.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.