Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Model-based Optimization of Anguilliform Swimming Gaits for Soft Robotic Applications
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In this paper, we introduce the Soft Lamprey-Inspired Dual Environment Robot (SLIDER) and a proper modeling and optimization procedure employed to design the robot. We represent the primary fluid environment actions - inertial effects, vortex forces, and viscous dissipation - using Lighthill's theory for large-amplitude elongated bodies. For structural design parameters such as internal pressure, tail size, and body stiffness, a fast, geometrically and materially nonlinear model is developed and validated. The fluid-structure interaction equations are solved implicitly with an efficient second-order box method. A pneumatic manifold robotic system is employed to actuate SLIDER in a quiescent water tank environment, allowing cross-comparison of computational and experimental results. We find that low-frequency swimming is dominated by resistant environmental forces, whereas higher-frequency swimming is primarily affected by inertial fluid forces. Using our efficient model alongside a genetic algorithm, we co-optimize a swimming control pattern and caudal fin design (subject to SLIDER's climbing morphology) to achieve a tethered swimming speed of 21.7 +/- 0.4 cm/s (0.59 Bl/s). Furthermore, we investigate the optimization procedure for a multimodal robot performing both swimming and climbing tasks.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.