A new era for AI Search
The goal of Search has always been simple: to help you ask anything on your mind — from quick facts to the deep, complex or hyper-specific questions that can be hard to articulate.
To make this possible, we’ve continued to reimagine what Search can do with AI. The momentum has been incredible: Just one year after its debut, AI Mode has surpassed one billion monthly users, with queries more than doubling every quarter since launch. As people have realized just how much more Search can do for them, they’re searching more than ever before — so much so that last quarter, we saw queries reach an all-time high.
Today at I/O, we shared the next step in our journey to bring together the best of a search engine with the best of AI. Here's a look at what we announced.
Powerful AI, right in Search
Starting today, we’re upgrading Search with Gemini 3.5 Flash — our newest Flash model delivering sustained frontier performance for agents and coding — as the new default model in AI Mode for everyone globally.
Because your curiosity doesn’t always fit into keywords, we’re also introducing the biggest upgrade to our Search box in over 25 years — now completely reimagined with AI. This intelligent Search box puts our most powerful AI tools right at your fingertips, making it easier to ask your questions.
It’s more intuitive than ever, dynamically expanding to give you space to describe exactly what you need. Designed to anticipate your intent, it also helps you formulate your question with AI-powered suggestions that go beyond autocomplete. And you can search across modalities, using text, images, files, videos or Chrome tabs as inputs. You’ll continue to get a range of results from Search, just like you do today. The new intelligent Search box is starting to roll out today, in all countries and languages where AI Mode is available.
We’re also making it even simpler to continue the conversation with Search. You can easily ask a follow-up question right from an AI Overview, and flow into a conversational back and forth with AI Mode. Your context stays with you, and as you explore more deeply, the links and supporting articles get even more relevant. This seamless experience is live today across desktop and mobile, worldwide.
Search agents
We’re entering the era of Search agents, where you can easily create, customize and manage multiple AI agents for your many tasks, right in Search. We’re starting with information agents. Operating in the background, 24/7, these agents intelligently reason across information to find exactly what you need at exactly the right moment.
With information agents, you can stay updated on whatever matters most to you. Your agent will intelligently look across everything on the web, like blogs, news sites and social posts, plus our freshest data, such as real-time info on finance, shopping and sports, to monitor for changes related to your specific question.
It will send you an intelligent, synthesized update, with the ability to take action. So if you’re apartment hunting, you can brain dump all of the exact requirements you’re looking for, and your agent will continuously scan for you, notifying you when listings meet your needs. Or if you want to know the instant any of your favorite pro athletes announce a sneaker collab, your agent will let you know when a new drop lands so you don’t miss out. Information agents will launch first for Google AI Pro & Ultra subscribers this summer.
We’re also expanding agentic booking capabilities in Search to a wide range of new tasks, including local experiences and services. Just share your specific criteria — like finding a private karaoke room for six on a Friday night that serves food late — and Search brings together the latest pricing and availability with direct links to finish booking through the provider of your choice. And for select categories like home repair, beauty or pet care, you can ask Google to call businesses on your behalf. These capabilities will roll out to everyone in the U.S. this summer.
Agentic coding in Search
We’re bringing the power of Google Antigravity and the agentic coding capabilities of Gemini 3.5 Flash right into Search. Search can build the ideal response, in the right format for your question — completely on the fly. So you can get custom generative UI, including visual tools and simulations, tailored precisely to your needs.
Whether you want to wrap your mind around astrophysics or visualize how your watch works, Search can design custom layouts, assembling components (like interactive visuals, tables, graphs or simulations) in real-time. These generative UI capabilities will be available for everyone in Search this summer, free of charge.
But often, you aren’t asking one-off questions — you have an ongoing task you find yourself searching for over and over, like planning a wedding or managing a home move. Search can go a step further, building you custom dashboards or trackers that you can continue to come back to and make progress on. You can think of these like mini apps for your own specific tasks.
Say you’re looking to establish a new health and wellness routine. You can ask Search to build you a custom fitness tracker. Search will code it for you, tapping into fresh, real-time sources including reviews, live maps and local data like the weather, so you get a tracker that works for you, helping you stay on track week after week.
You’ll be able to build custom experiences with Antigravity, like mini apps, right in Search in the coming months, starting first for Google AI Pro and Ultra subscribers in the U.S.
Expanded Personal Intelligence in Search
Finally, for AI to be most helpful, it shouldn't just know the world’s information, it should understand your context, too. So today, we’re expanding Personal Intelligence in AI Mode to more people in nearly 200 countries and territories across 98 languages — no subscription required. You can securely connect apps like Gmail and Google Photos, and soon Google Calendar. Personal Intelligence was designed with transparency, choice and control at its core. You’re always in control — you choose if and when you want to connect apps like Gmail and Google Photos.
This is the next chapter of Google Search: intelligent AI that puts the world’s information to work for you. So ask whatever’s on your mind, and Search can now do more for you than ever before.