Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Damage Adaptation in Seconds for Architected Materials
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Adaptation to damages and in-situ physical repairs is essential for long-term robot autonomy, yet challenging outside of narrowly defined and well-anticipated bounds. In this work we proprioceptively adapt to catastrophic damage in soft-actuated systems in under one minute. Architected materials are well equipped for adaptation: actuator failure occurs gradually rather than acutely, and damage can be described in a low-dimensional, discrete coordinate space. Surprisingly, latent damage representations plus a simple yet robust ensemble method is sufficient for adapting to unseen damage in real-time. Moreover, we identify conditions under which exponential sample complexity collapses to linear sample complexity for learned representations of architected materials, a concrete advantage over rigid components or continuum soft mechanisms. We demonstrate LEAP, our method for adaptive proprioception, via a tracing task for a 6DoF soft wrist based on Handed Shearing Auxetic (HSA) actuators. Our algorithm is able to adapt to cuts, burns, and actuator repairs, enabling simulation-free real-time adaptation that is critical for realizing the promise of soft robots outside the lab. Videos and more information are available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.