Apple's Worldwide Developers Conference keynote is over and we're still unpacking every feature and what it means for you and Apple's ecosystem. And it's a lot.
As expected, WWDC was all about software and AI developments, from iOS 27 to Siri AI and its ability to automatically group tabs by topic and add new ones for you. Apple also unveiled a wide range of artificial intelligence -- or should we say Apple Intelligence? -- features coming soon.
We've unpacked everything announced at WWDC 2026 to give you the rundown of what's coming. But let's first get into the results of CNET's Big Guessing Game.
The CNET Group is hosting a Big Guessing Game contest across its websites -- CNET, Lifehacker, Mashable, PCMag and ZDNET. Throughout three rounds of guessing you can predict what Apple will unveil this year. Each answer you get right earns you one chance in a drawing to win the latest Apple Watch announced in September.
The Big Guessing Game Round 1 was all about Apple's new software (think iOS, iPadOS, VisionOS, WatchOS and MacOS). And now that WWDC's keynote is over, here are the results so far -- and what we still don't know.
Apple's new CEO did not speak at WWDC
June's WWDC keynote was likely the last one for Apple CEO Tim Cook before he resigns in September. And while 96% of CNET readers expected Apple's incoming CEO, John Ternus, to speak, he didn't. So congrats to the 4% who called it.
Here's some food for thought. Cook was Apple's chief operating officer before being named CEO. He was less involved in product development and announcements and instead built and refined the robust supply chain ecosystem that helped Apple become a trillion-dollar company.
Ternus is currently Apple's vice president of hardware engineering and has been part of Apple's keynotes before, but he didn't speak this time. We'll have to see if any special announcements come from Ternus in the coming months, but for now, we'll reminisce over Cook's trademark, low-key "good morning" that opened each WWDC during his tenure.
MacOS 27 is nicknamed Golden Gate
CNET readers didn't come to a consensus on what MacOS 27 would be named. Only one CNET reader guessed correctly -- Golden Gate -- but there were a few guesses that stood out. Since 2013, MacOS has always had a nickname based on a California landmark, such as Mavericks or Catalina. Before that, Apple named its Mac software after big cats, including Cheetah, Jaguar and Puma.
Here's a look at earlier versions. Keep in mind that Apple changed its numbering convention in 2025 to reflect the year following its release.
- MacOS 26 (2025): Tahoe
- MacOS 15 (2024): Sequoia
- MacOS 14 (2023): Sonoma
- MacOS 13 (2022): Ventura
- MacOS 12 (2021): Monterey
- MacOS 11 (2020): Big Sur
'Apple Intelligence' was mentioned 52 times
CNET counted 52 mentions of "Apple Intelligence" during the WWDC keynote. The median guess from CNET Group readers was 26, while the average guess was 68. (There were some very high guesses.)
Several Apple Intelligence features were announced during WWDC, including new ones for Apple Home, Shortcuts automations and automatic password updates. There was also the anticipated reveal of Siri AI, which makes Apple's voice assistant more conversational and allows it to remember your earlier prompts. Siri AI works across Apple devices and can complete app actions on your behalf.
Apple Intelligence initially launched with a few features, including text rewriting, photo cleanup to remove unwanted objects and notification prioritization. However, AI has advanced significantly since 2024, and Apple is increasingly investing in its evolution.
An AI health coach wasn't announced
Speaking of AI, most CNET Group readers (89%) thought the next WatchOS upgrade would include an AI health coach, while 11% didn't believe so.
While WatchOS 27 was announced with a few updates that are only available to newer Apple Watches, the WWDC keynote did not unveil an AI health coach. If you're one of the fortunate watch owners who gets WatchOS27, expect a smarter app grid, a bilingual Workout Buddy and menopause and perimenopause insights in the Health app.
WatchOS 26 came with a few fitness upgrades, notably Workout Buddy, which is an AI-powered personal trainer that acts in real time.
Vanessa Hand Orellana, CNET's lead smartwatch writer, said in her commentary that Workout Buddy could be Apple laying the groundwork for fitness and AI. It's also a chance for Apple to see what it can do with AI on the smartwatch. Hand Orellana added that an AI-powered coach helps you understand your health data and motivates you to build better habits. So a health coach focused on your overall well-being isn't far-fetched, based on what we've seen from Apple. However, she doesn't predict an AI health coach will be available this year, but it could be on the table for WatchOS 28.
The iOS 27 public beta will drop in July
iOS 27 will include Siri AI, a standalone Siri app and an update to the Image Playground. Your first chance to test out iOS 27 is just around the corner. Cook announced that the developer beta version is available now, and the public beta will be available in July, though a specific date wasn't announced.
Only 17% of CNET readers were right on that front. Over half (53%) guessed that the public beta would be released this month, while 21% guessed September and 9% predicted August.
The public beta of iOS 26 came out on July 23, 2025, and the public beta of iOS 18 came out on July 15, 2024. So it looks like Apple is following the same pattern.
Mark your calendars for July 7 for the second round of CNET's Big Guessing Game, where we'll focus on Apple devices, including the beloved iPad and iPhone. Remember, every correct prediction gets you closer to a chance at winning the latest Apple Watch in September.