Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Mind Your Steps: A General Learning Framework for Accurate Humanoid Foothold Tracking
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Enabling humanoid robots to operate in complex, dynamic environments remains a critical challenge, fundamentally limited by the ability to navigate robustly, safely, and accurately. While reinforcement learning with velocity-commanded policies has achieved remarkable robustness in humanoid locomotion, this approach lacks explicit control of the foothold placement, leading to unsafe behavior, such as stepping onto human feet, or imprecise navigation, hindering the following manipulation task. Conversely, explicit foothold-tracking policies offer a promising alternative by directly being commanded with target foot poses. However, existing approaches are often limited by unrealistic state assumptions, compromising real-world deployment, or they are part of staged pipelines, making them tied to specific downstream tasks. In this work, we introduce a novel, lightweight framework for training general-purpose 3D foothold-tracking policies. By dynamically providing footstep support through a goal sampler, this method enables the learned policy to be agnostic to specific terrains. Our new target representation effectively mitigates challenges arising in the real world, such as noisy and inaccurate pose estimation and foot contact estimation. Designed for direct real-world transfer, our policy acts as a standalone low-level controller that can be seamlessly paired with various high-level foothold generators. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework through extensive experiments in simulation and in the real world. By coupling our policy with different upstream planners, we achieve natural and accurate locomotion in challenging settings, paving the way for loco-manipulation tasks in complex environments.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.