Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:MoECodec: Image Compression for joint human and machine perception via Mixture-of-Experts
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Image compression for machines calls for a unified codec that serves multiple downstream vision tasks. Existing approaches either adopt task-specific end-to-end designs, raising parameter and deployment overhead, or rely on transfer-based adaptations that remain externally attached and heuristic task design. A key limitation shared by both lines of work is their largely static computation pattern, which applies similar transformations across tokens despite the fact that different image regions exhibit markedly different semantic importance and complexity for machine perception. We propose MoECodec, a token-aware image compression framework that supports multiple downstream tasks within a single model. MoECodec replaces the FFN layers in transformer-based compression model token-wise Mixture-of-Experts (MoE), enabling dynamic, token-level computation conditioned on the input content and task objective. To make MoE effective in compression model, we introduce a stable routing strategy that combines expert-choice routing with spatial total variation regularization to encourage spatially coherent assignments, and we propose a lightweight expert architecture, Group Shuffle MLP (GShMLP), to control parameter growth. Extensive experiments show consistent improvement against baselines on both conventional image reconstruction and machine tasks.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.