Today, we’re announcing creator assistant on Facebook, a personalized creative partner for creators built directly into their dashboard on Facebook. Creator assistant understands each creator’s unique presence — their audience, engagement trends, and performance — and helps them take action to grow.
Creator assistant is part of our overall investment to enhance the creator experience on Facebook with AI, from powering discovery that connects people with creator content they’ll love and helping creators find their next idea to breaking down barriers that once limited their reach.
Go Beyond The Numbers To Understand The Why
Behind the best creator content is usually a lot of time spent digging into performance and figuring out what worked, why, and what to try next. Knowing what performed well has gotten easier over time — but understanding why something has resonated has remained one of the hardest questions for creators to answer. This requires connecting dots across formats, timing, audience consumption, and more — all while managing a brand.
Creator assistant is designed to help unlock those answers. Rather than analyzing a bunch of different dashboards and charts, creators can simply go to their dashboard on Facebook and ask creator assistant the questions they want answered, like why a particular reel outperformed the rest, or how their audience has shifted over time. Creator assistant is conversational, so they can keep asking follow-up questions to dig deeper.
A Creative Spark When You Need It
Creators will get clear, actionable responses based on each creator’s own specific Facebook presence, including why content resonates more with their audience and what they can do differently to improve performance. The result: ideas and insights that are tailored, relevant, and actionable.
When creative blocks hit, creator assistant acts as a brainstorming partner — drawing on what’s trending on Facebook to suggest fresh ideas, new content angles, and timely inspiration. Think trending audio, cultural moments, and top-performing content styles. With each interaction, creator assistant learns what the creator is working towards — whether that’s audience growth, deeper engagement, or monetization — creator assistant tailors its recommendations accordingly.
Creator assistant on Facebook is rolling out to creators in the US, Canada, and India. Over the coming months we’ll add new capabilities to creator assistant and expand access to more countries.
Learn more about how to use creator assistant here.
Reaching Global Audiences With AI-Powered Reels Translations
In addition to helping creators work smarter, AI is breaking down language barriers so creators can expand their reach to new audiences. Since introducing AI translations last year, creators across 9 languages have used translations to unlock some of the largest audiences on Reels. Over half a billion users on Facebook are now watching AI-translated videos weekly. AI translations preserve the sound and tone of a creator’s voice, and with optional lipsyncing, it really feels like the creator is speaking another language. Available languages will soon be expanding to Arabic, Bahasa Indonesian, French, Thai, and Vietnamese. Learn more and get the latest updates here.
What we’re sharing today is just the beginning. We’re committed to building AI-powered tools that help creators succeed on Facebook, and we’re excited to learn as we go.