Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Building Change Detection in Earthquake: A Multi-Scale Interaction Network and A Change Detection Dataset
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:As one of the most destructive natural disasters, earthquakes have struck many countries around the world in recent years, causing serious economic losses. Change detection (CD) can be applied to post-earthquake damage assessment as it can infer destroyed change regions from multi-temporal remote sensing images. Furthermore, the CD with short imaging interval will better satisfy the needs of the emergency rescues after earthquakes. However, the capability of current methods built on deep neural networks is limited because the dataset with short imaging interval is absent. To meet post-disaster immediate relief, we create a CD dataset, Turkey earthquake CD dataset (TUE-CD), for the evaluation of building damage in the short term after an earthquake. Because of the short acquisition interval of the post-event images, the imaging angle is different for different temporal images, which leads to some side-looking problems. To deal with these challenges, we present a multi-scale feature interaction network (MSI-Net) for efficient interaction between bi-temporal features, as well as mitigating the effect of side-looking problems. Specifically, the proposed MSI-Net consists of joint cross-attention (JCA) modules, multi-scale offset calibration (MOC) modules, and feature integration (FeI) modules. The JCA module unifies channel cross-attention and spatial joint attention for sufficient feature interaction. The MOC module further estimates the offsets to align the bi-temporal image with the multi-scale features. Finally, calibrated features and multi-scale features are fused by FeI modules for the prediction of changed areas. Experiments on the WHU-CD, CLCD, and the constructed TUE-CD dataset indicate that the proposed MSI-Net provides better results than considered state-of-the-art CD methods.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.