Computer Science > Robotics
Title:MotionVLA: Injecting Geometric Motion into Vision-Language-Action Model
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Vision-language-action (VLA) models increasingly condition robot policies on history, depth, or 4D features to resolve ambiguity in long-horizon manipulation. However, more spatiotemporal evidence is not necessarily better: when the injected evidence is not motion-consistent, it can introduce geometric drift, fragmented temporal cues, and unstable action generation. This raises a simple question: should a VLA remember past frames, or remember the motion that connects them? We introduce MotionVLA, a motion-history interface that converts a short past-only video window into compact, time-continuous trajectory-field tokens. Instead of treating history as a sparse set of ndependently lifted frames, MotionVLA represents recent observations as physically coherent motion evidence. Current visual tokens query this history to retrieve task-relevant motion information, which is then recoupled into the VLA stream under trajectory-grounded supervision. Experiments across simulation benchmarks and preliminary real-robot rollouts show that MotionVLA improves long-horizon manipulation while producing smoother and more direct executions. These results suggest that effective VLA memory is not just about providing more 4D context, but about exposing motion-consistent evidence that is usable for control.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.