At Kyber, we're building the next-generation document platform for enterprises. Today, our AI-native solution transforms regulatory document workflows, enabling insurance claims organizations to consolidate 80% of their templates, spend 65% less time drafting, and compress overall communication cycle times by 5x. Our vision is for every enterprise to seamlessly leverage AI templates to generate every document.
Over the past 18 months, we’ve:
Kyber is backed by top Silicon Valley VCs, including Y Combinator and Fellows Fund.
We're seeking a hands-on Head of Engineering with a clear line of sight to CTO. This role is ideal for someone who is already operating as a 10x engineer, thrives in early stage environments, and is excited to design and scale mission-critical AI systems from first principles.
Responsibilities:
What We’re Looking For in You:
Join us in building and scaling a game-changing enterprise product powered by state-of-the-art AI. At Kyber, your contributions will directly impact how businesses handle some of their most critical workflows and customer interactions.
If you’re obsessed with building, AI, and transforming enterprise workflows, we’d love to hear from you!
We want to hear from extraordinary individuals who are ready to shape the future of enterprise documents. To stand out, ask someone you’ve worked with to send your resume or LinkedIn profile, along with a brief 2-3 sentence endorsement, directly to arvind [at] askkyber.com.
Referrals matter. They help us understand the impact you’ve already had and the kind of teammate you’ll be. A strong referee can elevate your application, so choose someone who knows your skills and character well.
Apply today and help us bring enterprise documents into the AI-native age.
With Kyber, companies operating in regulated industries can quickly draft, review, and send complex regulatory notices. For example, when Branch Insurance's claims team has to settle a claim, instead of spending hours piecing together evidence to draft a complex notice, they can simply upload the details of the claim to Kyber, auto-generate multiple best in-class drafts, easily assign reviewers, collaborate on notices in real-time, and then send the letter to the individual the notice is for. Kyber not only saves these teams time, it also improves overall quality, accountability, and traceability.