Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Semidefinite Relaxations for Collision-Free Motion Planning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We study semidefinite relaxations for collision-free motion planning. We focus on a point robot moving from start to goal through spherical obstacles in $\mathbb{R}^n$, subject to path continuity constraints and squared derivative costs; a setting that is conceptually simple yet captures the hardness of collision-free motion planning. We formulate this problem exactly as a nonconvex problem over polynomial curves, and present a natural semidefinite relaxation. We contribute two key theoretical insights; to our knowledge this is the first theoretical analysis of semidefinite relaxations for collision-free motion planning. First, we show that solving the convex relaxation is equivalent to solving, to global optimality, a related motion planning problem in a potentially higher-dimensional space. This geometric interpretation yields necessary and sufficient conditions for tightness, and a clear intuition for when the relaxation is loose. Second, we show that the relaxation admits a symmetry reduction that makes it significantly smaller than one might expect, with positive semidefinite cone sizes that scale linearly with the polynomial degree and are independent of the ambient dimension. The resulting relaxation is 10 to 100 times faster than direct nonlinear programming transcriptions solved with SNOPT and IPOPT, exhibits significantly lower variance in solve times, and reliably finds a locally optimal path for the original problem. We demonstrate its effectiveness as a convex steering function in an RRT planner for minimum-snap quadrotor planning with $C^4$ continuous trajectories.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.