Computer Science > Robotics
Title:A Scalable Embodied Intelligence Platform for Seamless Real-to-Sim-to-Real Transfer of Household Mobile Manipulation Tasks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Mobile manipulation is a fundamental capability in embodied intelligence robotics. The growing demand for robust and generalizable manipulation in unstructured household environments has driven rapid progress in embodied intelligence platforms. However, achieving a seamless transfer across the real-to-sim-to-real cycle faces three key challenges, including costly high-fidelity simulation scenes reconstruction, the complexity of systematic strategy evaluation in simulation, and incompatible real-world deployments. To address these challenges, we develop BestMan, a scalable and seamless real-to-sim-to-real platform that bridges the gap between the simulation and the real world, enabling effective strategy development, integration, and deployment for household mobile manipulation. Specifically, we design a novel Automated Scene Generation (ASG) module to reconstruct realistic simulations from real observations. Then, we propose a simulation-guided task formalization and skill learning architecture that supports the flexible integration and large-scale evaluations of hybrid skill strategies in simulation. Finally, to enhance the real-world scalability, we develop a Hardware-agnostic and Unified Middleware (HUM) to ensure seamless and compatible sim-to-real transfer across heterogeneous mobile manipulators for real deployments. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed platform in establishing standardized benchmarks and facilitating promising research in the field of mobile manipulation.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.