The latest AI news we announced in May 2026
For more than 20 years, we’ve invested in machine learning and AI research, tools and infrastructure to build products that make everyday life better for more people. Teams across Google are working on ways to unlock AI’s benefits in fields as wide-ranging as healthcare, crisis response and education. To keep you posted on our progress, we're doing a regular roundup of Google's most recent AI news.
Here’s a look back at some of our AI announcements from May.
May 2026 was packed with AI news. At Google I/O 2026, we officially entered the agentic Gemini era with the launch of Gemini 3.5 — which delivers frontier intelligence for agents and coding — and Gemini Omni, where Gemini’s ability to reason meets the ability to create. The Android Show set the stage with brand-new hardware built specifically for these tools, including the Googlebook from our hardware partners. We also broadened our personal wellness tools with the new Google Health app and Fitbit Air, and launched an initiative to apply advanced quantum science and AI to the life sciences. Ultimately, May was all about making AI more proactive, helpful and integrated into your everyday life.
Experience Gemini Omni. We announced Gemini Omni, our new model that can create anything from any input — starting with video. Omni allows you to combine images, audio, video and text as input and generate high-quality videos grounded in Gemini's real-world knowledge.
Simulate real-world places. By combining Project Genie with Street View, we introduced an experimental new way to simulate and explore highly realistic, interactive 3D environments of real-world places right from your browser.
Learn how we partner with musical artists. Through a new partnership between Google Flow Music and Believe, we're equipping artists and producers with a creative AI collaborator to help throughout the creation process, from brainstorming lyrics and melodies to putting final touches on a song.
Discover what’s possible with Gemini 3.5. We launched our latest family of models combining frontier intelligence with action. With powerful new action-taking capabilities, Gemini 3.5 is built to help you reliably execute complex, multi-step agentic workflows across your apps.
Connect with your proactive 24/7 partner. The Gemini app is becoming a more helpful AI assistant, featuring an intuitive new UI, personalized daily briefs and Gemini Spark. Instead of just answering questions, it acts as a proactive helper — managing your inbox, scheduling appointments and anticipating your daily needs in the background.
Get more done with our advanced AI models in Search. Our next era for Search introduces new features that bring together the best of the web with the best of AI. We're launching information agents in Search to intelligently work in the background, 24/7. They'll monitor information on your behalf and send detailed updates with links to dive deeper and take action. We’re also bringing Antigravity and the agentic coding capabilities of Gemini 3.5 Flash right into Search, so Search can build generative UI and interactive visuals tailored to your questions, plus custom experiences like dashboards or mini apps for your ongoing tasks. And we introduced a new, intelligent Search box, marking its biggest upgrade in over 25 years.
With agentic coding capabilities in Search, you’ll be able to ask Search to code a custom fitness tracker for you, using real-time data like reviews, live maps and weather to keep you on track.
Stay in sync with Android Halo. To help you manage your agents, we introduced Android Halo, a new space on your phone that lets you see your agents’ progress and receive contextual assistance without interrupting your flow.
Simplify your shopping with Universal Cart. Universal Cart is your new hub for shopping on Google. Universal Cart works across merchants and across services, so you can add things to your cart while you’re browsing Search, chatting with Gemini, watching YouTube or even reading your Gmail.
Try the all-new Google Health app. The Google Health app brings all of your health and wellness into one place debuting new and advanced capabilities.
Meet the all-new Fitbit Air. Fitbit Air is our smallest tracker yet — a proactive wellness partner that uses high-fidelity sensor technology in a tiny, discreet pebble that enables advanced health and fitness tracking like 24/7 heart rate, heart rhythm monitoring with Afib alerts, SpO2, resting heart rate, heart rate variability, sleep stages and duration, and more. 1 2 3 4
Discover the new Googlebook. Googlebook is our newly designed laptop experience built from the ground up for Gemini Intelligence. It features the Magic Pointer for contextual suggestions, custom widgets to help you organize your tasks, cross-device features with Android phones and powerful AI features to help you get more done. Googlebooks will be made by our hardware partners like Acer, Asus, Dell, HP and Lenovo.
Upgrade your phone with Gemini Intelligence. Android is becoming more proactive. With Gemini Intelligence, your advanced phone can better understand your context, turn spoken thoughts into polished text and proactively suggest actions to help you throughout your day.
Bring next-gen Android to your car. Gemini is becoming even more helpful on the road. The next generation of Android in the car brings highly conversational voice controls, proactive routing and richer entertainment options so you can do more and have more fun while driving.
Get ready for new intelligent eyewear. We revealed our upcoming intelligent eyewear, with new frames and features that let you get directions, send texts, snap photos and more — all without taking out your phone.
Understand whether content online is AI-generated. To make it easier to understand how content was created and edited, we're expanding our content transparency and verification tools in Google Search, Gemini, Chrome, Pixel and Cloud.
Explore Gemini for Science. We unveiled Gemini for Science, a collection of science tools and experiments designed to expand the scale and precision of scientific exploration.
See AlphaEvolve’s real world impact. Find out how AlphaEvolve has been tackling real-world problems — from optimizing complex logistical supply chains and chip design to simulating molecular systems and electrical power grids.
Discover how AI can help protect our environment. We launched the Google DeepMind Accelerator program in the Asia Pacific region, dedicated to supporting startups using frontier AI to address critical climate, energy and environmental challenges.
See how quantum computing and AI could transform life sciences. We launched the Research Program at the Intersection of Life Sciences & Quantum AI (REPLIQA), an initiative committing $10 million to five universities to apply advanced quantum science and AI to the life sciences, to improve human outcomes.