Finding a new app on Apple’s App Store is about to become less about browsing top charts or picking through curated collections from App Store editors. This week, Apple announced a series of discovery features that will personalize app recommendations based on users’ interests and behavior, providing a new way for developers to have their app discovered.
At Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC), the iPhone maker introduced Personalized Collections in the App Store, which will showcase recommendations tailored to the individual. These will also include new “App Notes” that explain why the specific apps were recommended to you. Starting this week, you’ll find these new personalized suggestions in various places in the App Store, including the Apps or Games tab or on the Search tab.
The suggestions will also evolve over time based on a user’s app usage and downloads.
The feature will initially be available in English in the U.S., and will expand to other regions and languages over time, Apple says. It complements a range of other new tools designed to help developers better promote their apps to potential customers and encourage users to return to their apps and games.
The update reflects the maturity of the App Store ecosystem, where being featured by Apple’s App Store editors or being made “App of the Week” is no longer enough to drive guaranteed growth. As competition for users’ attention increases, a selection of new tools could help to re-engage existing customers, promote special offers, and package services together in new ways.
For instance, developers will now be able to use rich images and videos in their product page header and search results that can highlight their new content or seasonal offerings, which could encourage existing users to return to the app to see what’s new. They can also organize all their different marketing materials in a new Asset Library, where they can store regularly used assets for things like in-app events and special sales or promotions. Developers can also showcase special offers and engage players on the Apple Games app.
Apple will also allow App Bundles for developers running subscription businesses, allowing them to partner with other developers to offer groups of subscription apps for a lower price than if bought as separate subscriptions.
Under the new system, developers will also be able to sell subscriptions to larger groups and organizations using new options to build multi-user in-app purchase experiences.