Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a fun one, and if you spot a movie connection, the purple category might come together right away for you. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Earl Grey, hot.
Green group hint: Unforgettable tune.
Blue group hint: Lights, camera, action!
Purple group hint: You'll shoot your eye out.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Seen at a tea service.
Green group: Enduring song.
Blue group: Used in movie practical effects.
Purple group: Words before "story" in movie titles.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is seen at a tea service. The four answers are saucer, spoon, teacup and tongs.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is enduring song. The four answers are classic, hit, oldie and standard.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is used in movie practical effects. The four answers are makeup, miniature, prosthetic and puppet.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is words before "Story" in movie titles. The four answers are Christmas, Neverending, Toy and West Side.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.