Computer Science > Robotics
Title:HALOMI: Learning Humanoid Loco-Manipulation with Active Perception from Human Demonstrations
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Human demonstrations, which can be collected at scale and naturally capture active hand-eye coordination, are a promising data source for learning humanoid loco-manipulation. However, directly transferring human demonstrations to humanoids requires a precise world-frame tracking controller, which is often brittle under Out-of-Distribution(OOD) targets, while human-to-humanoid gaps persist in both egocentric observation and action execution. To address these challenges, we present HALOMI, a scalable framework for learning humanoid loco-manipulation with active perception from human demonstrations. HALOMI extends Universal Manipulation Interface (UMI) with egocentric sensing to collect ego-view and wrist-view observations along with head-hand trajectories at scale. We further propose a manifold-constrained controller that plans in a learned latent behavior manifold to enable precise and robust head-hand tracking in the world frame. To bridge the human-to-humanoid gap, we perform ego-view alignment and introduce a controller-aware reference trajectory adaptation to reduce mismatch in both observation and action execution. We validate HALOMI on a Unitree G1 humanoid robot with an actuated neck across five real-world tasks involving navigation, grasping, bimanual manipulation, whole-body coordination, and dynamic behaviors. Across the three quantitatively evaluated tasks, HALOMI achieves an average success rate of 85\%, while additional qualitative demonstrations show its ability to support dynamic tossing and deep-squat grasping.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.