Computer Science > Robotics
Title:BIM-Loc: BIM-Integrated Discrepancy-Aware LiDAR-based Indoor Localization
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Accurate and robust localization is a fundamental requirement for service and inspection robots, particularly in feature-sparse indoor environments where traditional systems struggle due to a lack of distinct landmarks. While prior maps can enhance robustness, precise and compact maps capturing real-world details are often unavailable for new or frequently changing environments. This paper presents BIM-Loc, a novel discrepancy-aware LiDAR-based localization method that directly integrates Building Information Models (BIM) from the design phase. BIM-Loc simultaneously estimates trajectories aligned with the BIM coordinate system and identifies discrepancies between real-world observations and the as-designed BIM in an online fashion. Our core contributions include: (1) a novel multi-hit ray casting strategy for efficient BIM-point data association and projection of 3D observations into 2D texture space; (2) a pose graph optimization framework with BIM-integrated factors that enforces consistency among odometry, sequential scans, and BIM structures; and (3) a hierarchical Bayesian inference module that incrementally updates a continuous 2D surface representation for discrepancy detection, propagating updates from the pixel to the structure level. Extensive evaluations in both simulation and real-world applications demonstrate that BIM-Loc significantly outperforms state-of-the-art map-based methods in localization accuracy and robustness.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.