Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:TeleMorpher: Toward Robust Simultaneous Motion-Location Editing
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in image and video generation and editing. While recent studies have extended these efforts toward motion editing, simultaneously transforming both motion and location-despite its practical importance-remains largely unexplored. To better understand robust motion-location editing, we first analyze the fundamental factors that degrade its quality. Based on this analysis, we propose TeleMorpher, one of the first one-shot frameworks to the best of our knowledge, for simultaneous motion-location editing. Our approach leverages motion priors, a target motion-centric video generated from an off-the-shelf model as motion-editing guidance, and the ground truth motion to enable more controllable and precise motion-location editing. Via this, our framework works as follows: (1) we first disentangle the protagonist and the background via pre-trained segmentation and inpainting models. (2) Then, we introduce a training-free pose warping that edits the protagonist's motion with the motion prior as the guidance. (3) The result of warped motion video is directly injected into a baseline motion editor during inference, mitigating the difference between source and target motions while preserving the appearance of the source video. (4) To enhance the reliability of quantitative evaluations, we propose two new LPIPS-based metrics that measure the background consistency before and after the motion editing and the fidelity of motion editing performance via measuring the difference between the extracted protagonist's skeletons from source and target videos. Experiments with in-the-wild videos and the TaiChi dataset demonstrate that TeleMorpher achieves superior performance across both quantitative and qualitative measurements (real-human evaluation), underscoring its effectiveness.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.