Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Gradient-Descent Steps to Success over Mean Accuracy: A Paradigm Shift for ML
View PDFAbstract:Traditional evaluation of machine learning (ML) models typically focuses on achieving the maximum possible accuracy irrespective of the computational cost. In this article, we propose a paradigm shift towards evaluating performance based on computational effort-explicitly defined here as the total number of gradient descent steps required to reach an acceptable level of accuracy with high probability. Building upon the concept of computational effort originally introduced by Koza for Genetic Programming, we extend this metric to any ML model trained via gradient descent. Furthermore, we demonstrate that minimising this effort acts as a novel form of Automatic Machine Learning (AutoML). By evaluating it across 11 diverse ML models and five standard classification datasets, we uncover significant insights into the dynamics of gradient-based learning. Our findings reveal that optimal hyper-parameters consistently favour unusually large learning rates. Crucially, we demonstrate that the rapid, aggressive landscape traversal enabled by these large rates not only promotes generalisation-as seen in phenomena like superconvergence-but also statistically minimises the expected computational effort for training. Furthermore, we identify distinct phase transitions in the optimal search strategy: while a single training run suffices for lower accuracy targets, reaching a model's performance limit requires a dramatic shift towards conducting numerous independent, short restarts. Finally, we illustrate how this effort-based paradigm provides a robust framework for model selection, allowing practitioners to choose optimal algorithms based on the difficulty of a problem as perceived by different models for a given target accuracy, or to maximise the achievable accuracy for a fixed budget of gradient descent steps.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.