Roborock is best known for its impressive lineup of robot vacuums, many of which have earned a spot on CNET's best list for their excellent performance and features. The company is new to the robot lawn mower market, at least in the US, launching the new RockNeo Q110H this week.
The lawnmower series is "powered with the latest navigation technology in the market and AI capabilities," said Ricky Ma, Roborock general manager for Europe and the Americas, in an email to CNET. Users can follow the mower and customize the job in real-time on apps, he said.
With wire-free navigation, the RockNeo Q110H features full-band real-time kinematic positioning via satellite and 3D visual SLAM robotic positioning with advanced obstacle avoidance. It also features a technology Roborock calls Sentisphere Environmental Perception, which the company says provides continuous, real-world awareness.
The robo lawn mower maintains its routes through dense tree cover, tight corners and narrow passages, Roborock says, and during internal testing, the RockNeo Q110H moved through areas as narrow as 2.3 feet.
In its press release, the company promised an AI-powered mapping update that will automatically learn lawn boundaries and optimize routes. But a company representative confirmed to me that the over-the-air update has already been rolled out and that the feature is enabled by default for consumers.
The RockNeo Q110H features a floating cutting deck and large-diameter wheels, providing greater traction and stability on challenging terrain and obstacles. During the company's testing, the machine cleared obstacles up to 1.57 inches high and slopes up to 45%, while maintaining cutting quality across bumps, dips and transitions.
In terms of other specs, it looks to be competitive with other top models we've tested: it can cover up to a quarter of an acre per day and works on small and medium lawns. It comes with a fast-charging battery and a docking station. The mower is IPX6 waterproof, but it also detects rain and returns to the charging station to take shelter, then resumes work automatically when conditions improve. If it gets covered in mud, Roborock says you can just rinse it off.
The Roborock app comes with all the standard features you'd expect, including the ability to manage multiple zones with unique schedules, monitor mowing progress and estimated completion. The robot has a wildlife-friendly mode that can pause mowing during schedule hours to accommodate the activities of nocturnal animals like hedgehogs.
You can also purchase a 4G Anti-Theft Module separately, which includes a high-decibel alarm if the mower is lifted and moved outside of the geofenced area. It comes with real-time tracking, remote alarm activation, PIN code lockout and compatibility with third-party trackers.
Price and availability
The RockNeo Q110H is available in the US exclusively through Roborock's Amazon storefront for $1,299