Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Training-Free Semantic Correction for Autoregressive Visual Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Autoregressive visual models (AVMs) based on next-scale prediction have emerged as a prominent paradigm for image and video synthesis. However, decomposing the generation process into discrete scales with varying granularities in AVM makes semantic errors difficult to identify and correct, thereby undermining the quality of the final output. Prior efforts to enhance AVM can be categorized into training-based and training-free approaches. Although training-based efforts to enhance AVM generation quality come at substantial computational cost, existing training-free methods neglect intermediate generation states, leaving semantic errors undiagnosed and allowing them to accumulate into the final output. In this paper, we focus on training-free paradigms and propose Gazer, a framework that integrates multimodal large language model feedback into the AVM sampling loop for in-generation semantic correction. Concretely, Gazer operates via two cooperating stages: the Reflective Diagnosis stage diagnoses semantic errors from intermediate states, while the Semantic Correction stage rewinds and rectifies the generation trajectory to realign with the target prompt. Experiments on compositional image and video benchmarks demonstrate that Gazer improves semantic alignment and compositional accuracy across multiple AVMs without additional training.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.