Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Programmable Silicon Retina on Pixel Processor Array
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Standard dynamic vision sensors approximate retinal processing by detecting temporal contrast changes, offering high speed and high dynamic range. In this work, we explore whether incorporating additional biologically inspired processing stages - specifically spatial filtering and gain control - can offer advantages for certain downstream tasks such as saliency prediction. We present the first implementation of a multi-stage Silicon Retina model on the SCAMP-5 Pixel Processor Array, along with a GPU-based simulation framework. We evaluate the performance of our model on Video Intensity Reconstruction and Video Saliency Prediction. While the bio-inspired model is less effective at reconstructing absolute intensity frames, it achieves a 13\% reduction in saliency prediction loss in comparison to standard DVS event representation, while reducing the event rate by approximately 47\%. These experiments are obtained using a lightweight $\approx 100$k-parameter FireNet-style network, adapted from event-based reconstruction to saliency prediction. These results suggest that the silicon retina's "information distillation" mechanism can achieve a more efficient representation for downstream neural networks, particularly in bandwidth-constrained edge applications.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.