Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Attribution-Guided and Coverage-Maximized Pruning for Structural MoE Compression
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models scale compute efficiently, yet remain expensive to deploy due to their substantial memory footprint and inference overhead. Prior compression methods mainly operate at the expert level, either removing entire experts or ranking experts by coarse-grained importance scores. However, such expert-wise decisions are often too coarse to capture fine-grained redundancy, leading to misallocated pruning budgets and limited compression. To address this problem, we observe that information within MoE experts is highly concentrated in a small subset of channels, leaving substantial redundancy even in experts deemed important. Based on this observation, we propose a structural pruning framework tailored for MoE models. Our method reformulates prune-ratio allocation as a channel-score coverage maximization problem and solves it efficiently using an attribution-based approximation. Experiments on DeepSeek and Qwen MoE models show that our method preserves model accuracy under 50% or 25% structured pruning when combined with 4-bit quantization. On Qwen3-30B-A3B, our approach reduces memory footprint by 5.27$\times$ and consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines across diverse benchmarks.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.