Amid intense backlash, the head of the American Diabetes Association posted a video Wednesday apologizing for the organization’s decision on Friday to forcefully remove five leading diabetes scientists from the association’s annual meeting.
The scientists were ejected for handing out copies of an April editorial—published in the ADA’s own journal Diabetes Care—that sharply criticizes the Trump administration for the damage and destruction it’s wreaking on biomedical research. The five scientists included Steven Kahn, professor of medicine at the University of Washington, who is the editor-in-chief of Diabetes Care and a co-author of the editorial. It also included former ADA President Desmond Schatz of the University of Florida.
The scientists were distributing the editorial outside the conference’s opening speech, which was originally scheduled to be given by Jay Bhattacharya, head of the National Institutes of Health under Trump. Bhattacharya canceled at the last minute, and senior NIH official Rick Woychik took his place.
Within minutes of beginning to hand out the editorial, police reportedly escorted the scientists out of the conference, which was held in New Orleans. The police reportedly shoved at least one scientist, took all of their conference badges, and threatened to arrest them if they tried to return. Louisiana State Police later told media that they acted at the request of the ADA. The ADA subsequently barred the five scientists from the rest of the conference.
In the video Wednesday, ADA CEO Charles Henderson personally apologized to the five scientists, including Aaron Kelly, pediatrics professor at the University of Minnesota; Justin Ryder of Northwestern University; and Irl Hirsch, also of the University of Washington, in addition to Kahn and Schatz.
“What transpired is not reflective of who I am, the values I hold, or the way I was raised,” Henderson said. “I will work hard to bring our community back together to build on the progress we have collectively made for those affected by diabetes.”
While the ousting immediately stunned and outraged members of the diabetes research community, Henderson’s video is in sharp contrast to the ADA’s series of statements over the past several days that tried to justify the decision. At first, a media team for the ADA told MedPage Today that “these attendees were escorted out by our onsite event security because they demonstrated behavior not consistent with this code of conduct” for the conference.