Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Duet: Dual-Robot Understanding via Efficient Teaching
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Dual-robot collaboration enables tasks that exceed the reach and payload of a single robot, such as collaboratively transporting objects across environments and executing coordinated handovers. Data acquisition is the primary bottleneck for training these systems. To this end, we introduce DUET, a dual-robot learning framework for mobile manipulation. For efficient data collection, we create a unified dual-embodiment synchronized VR-based teleoperation system for in-domain heterogeneous robot data collection. We further develop a complementary tracking pipeline that records human-human coordination and collaborative mobile manipulation priors. To allow efficient learning, we introduce an Action Chunking Transformer based architecture that first pretrains collaborative policies on efficient human-human demonstrations, before finetuning them on a minimal set of real-robot teleoperation trajectories. We develop a benchmark of four collaborative tasks to evaluate our framework using a Unitree G1 humanoid and a Dexmate Vega1 mobile manipulator. The results demonstrate that harnessing human priors not only yields superior task performance compared to baselines trained only on robot data, but also reduces the total human effort required for data collection. Our human data collection pipeline achieves 5.4x acceleration on average from teleoperation, but we perform equally or better than robot-only data trained policies across all tasks. Our project page is available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.