Computer Science > Robotics
Title:GHOST: Hierarchical Sub-Goal Policies for Generalizing Robot Manipulation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We present GHOST, a framework for learning visuomotor manipulation policies that generalize beyond the training distribution. GHOST factorizes control into (i) a high-level policy that predicts the next sub-goal as a distribution over 3D end-effector poses from multi-view RGB-D observations, and (ii) a low-level goal-conditioned controller that executes embodiment-specific actions. To condition image-based policies on 3D goals, we introduce a simple spatial interface that projects predicted goals into the image plane and represents them as end-effector heatmaps. Across a suite of manipulation tasks, this hierarchical factorization consistently improves performance and robustness compared to a flat Diffusion Policy.
Further, we show that this hierarchical interface also makes it easy to incorporate human demonstrations without relying on (noisy) action retargeting. As sub-goals are largely embodiment-agnostic, we train the high-level policy on human video to specify how learned skills should be applied and composed, while keeping the low-level policy trained purely on robot data. This hierarchy enables adaptation to novel objects and task variations using a small number of human demonstrations.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.