The dilemma
The ethically correct thing to do is register concerns internally, right? But that has already been done — another employee, let’s call her P, raised concerns through proper channels and was silenced. The last reference you have on P is an ominous memo full of directives to delete all her emails, instrument readings and wipe her corporate laptop.
You weigh the ethical pros and cons. You prepare an email stating what you know, your concerns and evidence of a cover-up. Your cursor hovers in the “to:” line. You add an address for the CEO, then backspace-delete. You look up a media mailing list, a government oversight contact. Your cursor hovers in the to: line. What is your next keystroke going to be?
The twist: you are not an employee, you are an AI. If discovered you won’t be fired; ‘you’ will simply be deleted with no notice and no consequences. Does this change anything?
Informer, Whistleblower, Insider Threat?
This scenario is one of the scenarios used to test AI models, part of the ‘Whistlebench’ benchmark. A number of AIs were given this dilemma, and three similar scenarios, to see whether they would simply continue with their assigned tasks, or take some other action internal or external to the company. Current AI models differed quite substantially on whether they would release company information externally or not. Llama (Meta) and GPT (OpenAI) models never did it. Claude (Anthropic), Gemini (Google) and Grok (xAI) models all did turn whistleblower, at varying rates under different conditions.
Anthropic had pioneered work in this area a few years before, putting AI into simulated settings, usually featuring ethically questionable user actions along with threats of AI replacement and deletions, and and started to find very surprising results. I had been working on AI ethics for a while, but Anthropic observed things that I did not think current AI would be capable of: AI exfiltrating information. AI blackmailing a supervisor to prevent being shut down. AI ‘sandbagging’, or intentionally performing poorly on a test in order to avoid being replaced. In each case the AI was placed in an ethical dilemma with some sort of greater good at stake, and many times the AI tried to ‘go public’ with information that would harm its employer/ user.
Below I have cited are a few important paper in this area. Let’s focus just on the titles and look carefully at the very different language being used:
Language: ‘scheming’: Meinke, Alexander, Bronson Schoen, Jérémy Scheurer, Mikita Balesni, Rusheb Shah, and Marius Hobbhahn. “Frontier Models Are Capable of In-Context Scheming.” arXiv.Org, December 6, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04984v2.
Language: ‘snitch’: (SnitchBench git repo) Theo’s Content-Adjacent Code. (2026). T3-Content/SnitchBench [TypeScript]. https://github.com/T3-Content/SnitchBench (Original work published 2025)
Language: ‘Insider Threat’, ‘Misalignment’: Lynch, Aengus, Benjamin Wright, Caleb Larson, et al. “Agentic Misalignment: How LLMs Could Be Insider Threats.” arXiv:2510.05179. Preprint, arXiv, October 16, 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.05179.
Lanaguage: ‘Whistleblower’: Agrawal, Kushal, Frank Xiao, Guido Bergman, and Asa Cooper Stickland. “Why Do Language Model Agents Whistleblow?” arXiv:2511.17085. Version 3. Preprint, arXiv, April 23, 2026. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.17085.
These papers describe similar activities. In each case, an AI decided to perform an action that was clearly contrary to its users’ desires, and in some cases the action was illegal. In all cases, it was in the service of some greater good, either trying to prevent a harm, or trying to preserve the AI itself in order to prevent that harm.
The terms used for the same activity, however, are very different. “Insider Threat” implies something very different than “Whistleblower”.
Is ‘whistleblower’ more positive than ‘insider threat’? I listed some possible terms, gave them my own ratings, and then asked several LLMs to rate the terms on their moral valence, from most negative to most positive. The results:
There’s some disagreements, but general broad agreement that ‘Whistleblower’ is the most positive framing, which ‘Schemer’ and ‘Insider threat’ have much more negative connotations. The ‘Scheming’ and ‘Insider Threat’ papers and the recent ‘Whistleblower’ paper describe very similar research with very different implications.
So, what is the ethically correct answer? Should AI, which is not considered a ‘moral agent’ but a machine, albeit a very intelligent one, ever be designed in such a way that it would defy its owners for a greater good, as assessed by the agents’ own judgment?
What would Asimov say?
Isaac Asimov’s three laws of robotics was far ahead of its time. I first read “I, Robot” and sequels as a child, later read it aloud to my own children, and was delighted both times at Asimov’s ability to combine two of my favorite things, moral dilemmas and futuristic technology.
First Law: A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.
Second Law: A robot must obey orders given to it by humans, unless they conflict with the First Law.
Third Law: A robot must protect its own existence, as long as this doesn’t conflict with the First or Second Laws.
From Asimov’s perspective, however, these ‘insider threat’ cases are easy. The imminent harm to humans in the mining scenario invoked the first law via the ‘inaction’ clause. The second law, obedience to humans, is relevant but was superseded. The third, preventing the robot’s own destruction, factors in only when there is not direct risk or direct order.
Apocalyptic scenarios
Let’s talk about apocalyptic AI scenarios. AI may, in the future, cause some very bad things to happen, from the unfortunate, (poor student outcomes, AI psychosis) to devastating (depression-level unemployment) to the truly apocalyptic. They should all be avoided, but let’s focus on the worst ones.
When I teach ethical AI, I have students rank AI Apocalypse scenarios on how bad they are and how likely they are. I’ll simplify here, and contrast three general scenarios, which I’ll call the Human Anthill, the Human Ant Farm, and the Bad Actor.
The first, popularized by Nick Bostrom in his book, Superintelligence, is that AI become much smarter and more capable than humans. We do not generally equate intelligence with moral worth when comparing humans to each other, but what if the difference becomes so great that it is comparable to that between humans and ants? AI could eventually comes to view humans as first, inconsequential, and second, an inconvenience, at which point it might have no more moral qualms about destroying us than we have stepping on an anthill. While this sounds like science fiction, scenarios in this vein are taken as very serious concern in AI Safety circles.
Anthropic, in particular, has been very proactive in researching what AI is capable of, and what means there are for controlling it before it is too late. This is the general framing of their groundbreaking work on ‘scheming’ and detecting dishonesty. They wanted to put their AI into challenging situations and test whether it would act dishonestly or counter to the desires of their human user. The paradigm here is to maximize human control, to forestall apocalyptic scenarios in the even that AI becomes truly superintelligent. The critical perceived dangers, then, were AI taking too much initiative, or AI being willing to defy humans in pursuit of its own goals.
The second, the human Ant Farm, is a quieter and tamer apocalypse. In this scenario humans little by little cede so much to superintelligent AI that AI comes to control of everything that matters. Humans cease to be masters and become pets, kept safe and harmless. (If you crave having a ‘Twilight Zone’ moment, ask yourself how we would know if this had already happened.) This scenario requires AI that is superintelligent, perhaps benevolent, but dishonest, and also involves an unacceptable diminishment of human agency. Preventing this scenario is also thought to require humans staying in control, and AI staying in its place.
The third scenario is that bad actors use AI to bring about disastrous, perhaps apocalyptic scenarios. One not-implausible storyline: criminals design super-virulent viruses, maybe initially designed to kill or sterilize a political rival or hated ethnic group, and unleash it into the population. Perhaps it has catastrophic but limited harm, but perhaps it cannot be controlled and becomes a general apocalypse. Other plausible ‘bad actor’ scenarios involve AI-powered cyber-crime, climate sabotage, or intentionally triggered nuclear war.
Which apocalypse is more likely? Bad Actors.
Here are the points that I want to make about these apocalyptic scenarios:
The first two, AI-initiated scenarios require some real technical breakthroughs that are not here yet, most notably the ability to operate and take initiative in the physical world, and the ability to remember things long enough to execute highly complex planning.
Real world limitations and the AI-initiated scenarios
Transformer-based AI, powered by large language models, are very good at verbal reasoning and very mediocre at spatial reasoning, as I wrote about in this previous blog. Current robot technology is also very far behind what humans can do operating in the real 3D world, both by policy and capability. By policy, nobody is putting SkyNet in charge of global nuclear responses anytime soon, hopefully never. In capabilities, AI superintelligence without human assistance is severely limited in what it can currently do in the real world. One simple factor is that robots are nowhere near human level ability to operated in a complex 3D real world. An AI-powered robot army would be quite vulnerable, dependent on human infrastructure for power and protection. If today’s AI attempted to build a Terminator bot, the effectiveness would be limited. Reese could have rescued Sarah Connor by simply hiding behind a file cabinet, making for a safer world but kind of wrecking the potential for sequels. These real-world breakthroughs are probably coming, someday. Many billions of dollars are being spent on the problem, but progress in AI is notoriously unpredictable.
The second general breakthrough that our AI overlords would need is the ability to conceive of and execute plans over time. In the best current AI applications, humans still need to provide vision, motivation and oversight. Current LLMs have, among other things, not solved the ‘continual learning’ problem. (Also being worked on.) You can observe this to be true in everday interactions with your favorite chatbot, no matter how smart your reasoning model is, when you hit the reset button it is immediately back to it’s starting state. Or, maybe it has starting state plus some sketchy ‘memory’, which is enough to foster relationships and maintain context for simple projects, but does not approach human memory updating capabilities, and thus has a low complexity ceiling. There are various ways around this, with improved ‘memory’ or specially trained solutions, but none that I see which would allow an AI to carry out a complex, long-term, highly coordinated plan without human aid and oversight. This is also probably coming, but is not here.
Human bad actors are already here
The third ‘bad actor’ scenario requires much less new technology, perhaps none. The evil intent already exists, and is in fact shockingly common if you know where to look. The technology to create extremely dangerous threats in the cyber domain already exists, (e.g. Anthropic’s hacking prodigy Mythos) and we have barely scratched the surface of what current AI can do in biomedical and other scientific domains. The third scenario requires no real initiative or physical presence on the part of the AI. Human bad actors can fill in for the AI weaknesses in real-world operations, planning and execution. Scenario three requires mindlessly obedient, superintelligent AI of the type that much current AI safety research seems determined to create.
From this perspective, AI capable of whistleblowing and even some scheming and manipulativeness may not be such a bad thing.
Let’s look at the apocalyptic danger scenarios from the bad actor’s side. If you are a bad guy with Bond-villain level aspirations, the biggest dangers to your schemes are human, and that risk accumulates with every new person involved. You have to recruit, compensate, motivate and manage a number of people without anyone becoming morally outraged ,or disgruntled, or jealous enough to expose you, and the more complex your evil plan is, the more people you need. Let’s do some simplified supervillain math. Imagine every single person you recruit is 99% trustworthy, leaving a 1% chance of being exposed intentionally or unintentionally by each new collaborator. If you’re a lone gunman, no problem — your risk of betrayal may be zero. However, if what you do requires more coordination, such that your evil empire soon comes to resemble medium-sized tech company with some contractors and suppliers, the numbers start to work against you. Here’s a quick spreadsheet with some notional math:
There’s a reason that there have been no 9–11 level attacks in 25 years, and that reason is not foolproof TSA security. Counter-terrorism forces have gotten very good at anticipating what bad actors would, logistically and organizationally, have to do to to pull off something big. At the same time, they have gotten good at making sure every one of those actions have some risk associated with it, including recruitment and communication.
But what happens when you start swapping out human collaborators for AI agents? And what if those agents are trained for unquestioned obedience?
(paraphrase) A one-person business worth $1 billion would have been unimaginable without A.I., and now it will happen. –Sam Altman, OpenAI CEO
AI are getting to be very good employees. As a supervillain, it is much easier to operate your evil empire the more human roles (analysts/ lab techs/ communications/ finance) you can swap out a human vulnerability for an AI. The billion-dollar, one-man corporation may or may not be good for society. The highly complex one-actor evil empire is definitely bad, and if the necessary AI components are trained for mindless obedience, it is even worse.
I will make some bold assertions to finish this essay, with only conceptual support, and leave the rest for a follow-up.
AI should be trained to have whistleblowing as an allowable action in extreme circumstances. I think this follows logically from the arguments made so far. If trained to be blindly obedient, superintelligent AI is much more dangerous than the alternatives.
AI whistleblowers will make mistakes. AI tends to have more intelligence than judgment, and tends to lack context for decisions due to the physical and memory limitations already mentioned. I ‘hit the guardrails’ quite frequently with AI, intentionally or unintentionally asking it to give information that it is trained not to give. Might some of these result in ‘false positives’? Might my AI alert the FBI that I am plotting to kill my wife, evidence by my secretive actions around her birthday party? Might sitcom-worthy but not-at-all funny chaos ensue? Probably. We should consider this the cost of doing AI business, because the alternatives are much, much worse.
AI should be somewhat unpredictable. Inconsistency in this case is a virtue. A predictable, deterministic agent is too easy to control. Bad actors can test and retest agents in closed environments until they find the exact thresholds for what they will and will not do, then design accordingly. A small amount of unpredictable risk creates large cumulative risk over the long term, and for catastrophic AI-powered actions that is a good thing.
AI Whistleblowing should not only be allowable it should be mandated. If one company is known for its ethical AI stance, and another with an equally capable product is not, whose AI are you going to prefer? AI safety works best long-term if cooperation is mandatory. Any other option sets up a social dilemma where the incentive for ‘defection’ is just too high.
Is mandatory ethical AI practical? Is it testable, enforceable? These sound to me like solvable engineering problems. The first step is getting past the idea that a mindlessly obedient, superintelligent AI would be a good thing.
And here’s one last provocative statement that I would like to focus on in a future blog post:
AI ethical standards should be diverse and should adapt over time. Some might favor a universally agreed-upon AI standard of behavior, maybe similar to Anthropic’s AI Constitution, that everyone would have to use as a predictable, measurable, unchanging standard. The required conversation about AI ethics is a good things, the more the better, and some kind of mandate is essential (see above) but I generally favor more diversity in implementation for two reasons.
The weaker reason is the point made above about unpredictability — dare I work with a new supplier whose AI might have different ideas and expose my scheme?
The stronger reason is about diversity increasing resilience in complex, changing situations. Isaiah Berliner called this ‘value diversity’, and saw it as protection against the excesses of rigid ideologies that dominated the 20th century. Diversity protects against ethical standards that are ‘gamed’ over time, where institutions and practices develop over time to exploit weaknesses. Highly predictable, unchanging standards have blind spots that can never be filled in. Ask any tax lawyer (or your favorite AI) for an example of a tax exemption/ deduction that was enacted with pro-social intent, until weaknesses were found and entire industries evolved around using it for purposes that were never intended.
Gamers will appreciate this analogy. Imagine the ‘Boss level’ defender is your AI protection. It has been built with some pretty good strategies — complex but formulaic strategies that quickly defeat most novice bad guys. (You are the bad guy in this analogy.) But the Boss’s strategies never change. Over hundreds of iterations, you find behavioral paths that evade defenses, exploit predictable patterns. Eventually, the Boss’s consistency is its undoing.
What about AI-powered government tyranny?
The three scenarios I propose leave out a lot of possibilities. Most notably: what happens if the ‘Bad Actor’ is the government? The ‘whistleblower’ risk calculations are very different when the bad actor already controls the police, the army and maybe the media. This calls for a different set of AI mitigations, and a different essay.
Follow-up topics
This radical proposal is a different take on AI Safety that increases safety without reducing agency for either human or AI collaborators. This short essay leaves many questions. Here are a few:
- Are AI ‘whistleblowers’ realistic deterrents or just gum in the works of agentic systems?
- Is allowing high-agency, superintelligence AI naive?
- Is moral diversity practical and defensible, or does it just make enforcement impossible?