Today, I’m proud to announce Homebrew 6.0.0.
The most significant changes since 5.1.0 are a new tap trust security mechanism, the new faster, smaller, default internal Homebrew JSON API, sandboxing on Linux, better defaults informed by our user survey, many brew bundle
improvements, improved performance and initial support for macOS 27 (Golden Gate).
✨ Highlights since 5.1.0
🔐 Tap trust
Homebrew 6.0.0 introduces tap trust. A third-party tap can contain arbitrary, unsandboxed Ruby that runs on your machine, so Homebrew now requires taps (and tap-qualified formulae and casks) to be explicitly trusted before their code is evaluated or run. This reduces the risk from malicious or compromised taps while leaving the official Homebrew taps trusted by default. See the new Tap-Trust documentation for details.
- Homebrew enforces initial tap trust so untrusted taps are flagged before their code runs, trusts qualified tap items before install, stops auto-tapping untrusted taps, pins tap allow, forbid and trust lists to remotes and uses tap trust when evaluating all formulae and casks.
brew tap
gains commands for managing tap trust, can trust a tap by its remote URL,brew trust
adds a--json=v1
flag andbrew tap-info
adds atrusted
field.brew bundle
honours thetrusted:
option andbrew bundle dump
records trusted bundle entries, marking custom-remote taps as trusted.- docs.brew.sh has new pages, including Tap-Trust, explaining Homebrew’s new tap trust model, and Homebrew trusts taps in test-bot.
⚡ Default internal JSON API
The internal JSON API is now the default, advancing the smaller API that Homebrew re-enabled and turned on for developers recently. It combines all Homebrew’s metadata into a single download, so brew
updates faster and talks to the network less. It was opt-in via HOMEBREW_USE_INTERNAL_API
since 5.0.0; that variable is now deprecated (see below).
🐧 Linux sandbox
The Linux Bubblewrap sandbox aligns Linux with macOS, where build, test and postinstall phases already run sandboxed. It is on by default for developers, Homebrew moved its macOS sandbox logic to share code, improved Linux sandbox behaviour (with Homebrew/homebrew-core setting the sandbox env in CI), hardened sandboxed install phases, sandboxed cask executable hooks, allowed logs in the build sandbox, installed Bubblewrap on hosted Ubuntu and skips sandbox setup for syntax-only jobs.
⚙️ Better defaults
- Following our Homebrew user survey, we have made many changes based on the results. The most notable is making
ask
mode the default for developers, sobrew install
andbrew upgrade
show a dependency summary and confirmation prompt before making changes. - Homebrew adds ask dependency plans and cask support, accepts one-key ask confirmations and aligns ask dry-run prompts.
- Homebrew fetches ask upgrades together, prints the ask upgrade summary sooner, skips the upgrade ask prompt when empty, adds a final
brew upgrade
summary and explains the upgrade metadata fetch.
📦 brew bundle
brew bundle
gains many improvements, most notably parallel formula installation that now runs jobs automatically by default, plus npm and krew extensions, wider cleanup support and, on Windows,winget
support.- Homebrew adds cleanup support to npm, cargo, go and uv extensions and asks before removing during cleanup.
- Homebrew runs
brew bundle krew
viakubectl-krew
directly, respectsCARGO_HOME
and friends forcargo
, adds a--describe
flag tobrew bundle add
and triesmas install
before falling back tomas get
. - Homebrew adds bundle type disable flags, improves check guidance and checks formula link status.
- Homebrew serialises formula locks, makes non-core DSLs a single file, removes description comments from
brew bundle/remover
and avoids parsing the output ofbrew services list
. brew bundle
performs npm installs more securely.
🏎️ Performance
Homebrew is faster across the board, with startup performance tweaks, a ~30% faster brew leaves
, parallelised bottle tab fetching on upgrade and less work loading Ruby libraries at startup.
🍎 macOS 27 (Golden Gate)
🔮 Upcoming changes
- macOS 27 (Golden Gate) drops Intel support, so per our Support Tiers: in September 2026, macOS Intel
x86_64
moves to Tier 3 with no CI support and no new bottles (binary packages) built for macOS Intel; in September 2027, macOS Intelx86_64
will be unsupported entirely and all related code deleted. - The
master
tomain
migration begun in 4.6.0 continues: more repositories no longer updatemaster
, GitHub Actions warn@master
users to migrate to@main
and thesync-default-branches
workflows are removed from Homebrew/homebrew-cask and Homebrew/homebrew-core. - Casks that fail macOS Gatekeeper checks, deprecated in 5.0.0, remain on track to be disabled in September 2026.
🔒 Security
🚨 Security advisories
Homebrew published three security advisories:
- The POST download strategy bypassed the documented HTTPS-to-HTTP redirect protection by discarding the resolved URL (GHSA-7699-qf8c-q47m), fixed by enforcing secure redirects.
- Root code execution was possible via Git hooks in the macOS
.pkg
postinstall (GHSA-6689-q779-c33m), fixed by cleaning Homebrew git state and replacing the installer git directory. - The macOS installer package trusted a user-controlled
/var/tmp
plist and could assign Homebrew ownership to a local attacker (GHSA-59v8-x8q4-px5c), fixed by tweaking the macOS.pkg
package-user plist handling.
🛡️ Other security improvements
- Homebrew filters sensitive environment variables during Ruby evaluations and defers
HOMEBREW_*
environment secrets to download time. - Homebrew runs forbidden checks for casks and formulae before download and lets you require checksums for casks with
HOMEBREW_CASK_OPTS_REQUIRE_SHA
. - Homebrew links to a shared security policy.
🗑️ Deprecations
- The Ubuntu 24.04 CI migration raised the Linux baseline to
glibc
2.39, so Linux systems with an older systemglibc
(such as Ubuntu 22.04 withglibc
2.35) are now Tier 2: no new bottles (binary packages) are built for them andbrew doctor
warns. Use theghcr.io/homebrew/brew
Docker image or upgrade to a Tier 1 configuration such as Ubuntu 24.04. - Homebrew deprecates default opt-ins.
- Homebrew deprecates now-default bundle and internal API environment variables such as
HOMEBREW_BUNDLE_NO_SECRETS
andHOMEBREW_USE_INTERNAL_API
. - Homebrew marks unused options for deprecation.
- Various other Homebrew 6.0.0 deprecations.
- Homebrew’s SBOM support is now opt-in with
HOMEBREW_SBOM
.
🎁 Features
🖥️ Casks
- Homebrew can pin casks and supports casks in
brew missing
. - Homebrew adds AppImage support for Linux and implements a Linux freedesktop trash for casks.
- Homebrew improves cask upgrades by sharing upgrade download queues, moving upgrade summaries before fetch, adding a quit opt-out and reopening closed apps during upgrade.
- Homebrew improves
auto_updates
casks: improving how they update, refining the behaviour further, gating auto-updates behind opt-in and upgrading them when the bundle version is stale. cask
adds agenerate_completions_from_executable
DSL artifact and includes resolved artifact targets in JSON output.- Homebrew shows a cask version transition in per-cask upgrade output, skips valid cached cask fetches, speeds up cask backup copies and has
caskroom
use the user’s primary group on Linux. brew doctor
andbrew cleanup
handle corrupt Caskroom directories.
💻 Operating system support
- Homebrew makes Linux cask requirements explicit, aligns cask macOS dependencies, supports bare
depends_on :macos
in casks, tracks macOS support explicitly and emits Linux variations for casks with Linux checksums. - Homebrew adds a maximum macOS for cask dependencies. Homebrew/homebrew-cask adopts the new
depends_on maximum_macos:
syntax and fixes its macOS dependencies in Homebrew/homebrew-cask and Homebrew/homebrew-core. - Homebrew adds M5 and M5 Pro/Max CPU recognition and caps the OCLP tier when macOS is outdated.
- Homebrew labels WSL analytics, shows the Windows build on WSL in
brew config
and moves thewsl?
boolean fromOS::Linux
up to theOS
module.
🚰 Taps
- Homebrew recognises more equivalent tap remote forms, ignoring a
.git
suffix when matching GitHub remotes and consolidating tap remote normalisation. (and more) - Homebrew handles formulae and casks more uniformly across commands, installs explicitly requested taps and stops implicit tap installation.
- Homebrew uses worktrees for local core taps and blocks worktree updates.
- Homebrew shares full-name parsing helpers and uses full-name helpers for split names.
ℹ️ brew info
and brew tap-info
brew info
output is clearer: more consistent and helpful, with a Binaries section listing executables, a clearer recursive runtime dependencies line, clearer same-named conflicts and shadowed formulae and a list versions JSON output.brew info
shows installed state better: the upgrade target for outdated@
-versioned formulae, installed dependents with--verbose
, deprecated and disabled packages in install status, installed formulae resolved from the receipt’s tap with a shadowing warning, the installed version and an upgrade hint on the headline, other installed versions and an installed info inventory.brew info
andbrew tap-info
skip the uninstalled marker when not a problem, show more tap info for packages andbrew tap-info
lists formulae and casks.brew which-formula
shows install status and Homebrew shows quarantine script usage.
🆕 New commands, flags and output
brew exec
is a new command, likenpx
, that supports formulae environments.brew as-console-user
is a new command for running Homebrew as the right user under MDM/root
environments andbrew update <formula>
is aliased toupgrade
.- Homebrew tidies help and completions: omitting aliases from completions, hiding
HOMEBREW_CASK_OPTS_*
from help, hiding maintainer commands and hidinghide_from_man_page
commands frombrew commands
. - Homebrew avoids install warning annotations and warns when formula executables are shadowed on
PATH
.
🧊 Cooldowns, livecheck and bumping
- Homebrew adds download cooldowns for Bundler, RubyGems livecheck, npm and pip defaults, PyPI resource resolution and npm and PyPI in
bump
to avoid upstream supply-side security risks. - Homebrew prints
bump
skip status, messages and errors and checks RubyGems licences. - Homebrew respects
livecheck
throttle days inaudit
, adds livecheck throttling by days and speeds up the formula throttle days check.
⬇️ Downloads and fetching
brew fetch --all-platforms
fetches every variant, Homebrew prints download error details when using concurrency, preserves partial downloads on network errors, avoids cached manifest downloads and hints when a download is HTML, not a binary.- Homebrew avoids redundant Caskroom
chgrp
.
🛎️ Services
- Homebrew starts systemd timers for services, creates service path directories automatically (with Homebrew/homebrew-core adopting the new service path creation logic) and audits redundant service path setup.
brew services
no longer fails to load with--sudo-service-user
.
🧪 Formulae and packaging
- Homebrew adds the VCS revision as
scm_revision
in the tab, supports in-repository patch files, supports CPS metadata directories and includes patches informula
to_hash
. - Homebrew respects installed dependents during autoremove and cross-checks
autoremove
candidates against formula definitions.
🪜 Install steps framework
- The install steps framework expresses common postinstall, preflight and postflight behaviour as ordered, literal-only DSL data that is exposed through the JSON APIs. Where a formula or cask only does simple file preparation, it no longer needs to download and evaluate a Ruby file at install time. Homebrew adds formula install steps, cask install steps, an audit for formula install steps, install step rebuild actions, rebuild step methods, rebuild step RuboCop checks and an audit of cask flight step conversions;
homebrew/core
andhomebrew/cask
adopt the new DSLs (post_install_steps
,postinstall
and flight steps). Inhomebrew/core
andhomebrew/cask
this covers a large share ofpost_install
and*flight
blocks (creating directories, touching markers, moving and symlinking files), with more operation types planned.
🔀 Other changes
brew vulns
is a new Homebrew tap and subcommand that checks installed packages for known vulnerabilities 🔒.- Homebrew warns for Nix-managed Homebrew.
🧹 Internals, typing and refactors
- Homebrew replaces
brew which-update
, uses an AST for source rewrites and enforces public API visibility and docs. - Homebrew reworks command parsing: parser subcommand scaffolding, converting the bundle, services and remaining subcommands, scoping subcommand option constraints and usage help, and no longer restricting global options to subcommands.
- Homebrew limits Sorbet runtime defaults and limits recursive Sorbet in test-bot.
🛠️ Continuous integration and developer tooling
- The Ubuntu 24.04 CI migration flagged in 5.1.0 for 6.0.0 has now landed, raising the Linux baseline.
- Homebrew annotates test-bot dependency impact, closes API-created issues that do not match a template and closes incomplete PRs.
- Homebrew’s
setup-homebrew
GitHub Action defaults to the stable tag and trusts taps on non-stablebrew
. brew lgtm
covers tap audits and formula tests and Homebrew works around a non-writable cache for lgtm commands inbrew.sh
.workflows/docker
builds Ubuntu 26.04 images andtest
disablesreturn false
handling.
📚 Documentation
- Homebrew’s documentation improves: the Rosetta cask support policy, unsupported multi-user setups, notability requirements,
-full
formula guidance, upstream expectations and lifecycle requests, the newauto_updates
behaviour and a consolidated deprecation policy. - Homebrew clarifies
compatibility_version
guidance and Homebrew/homebrew-core backfillscompatibility_version 1
. This will help reduce the number of formulae that need upgraded bybrew upgrade
over time.
Finally:
- Homebrew is a non-profit project run entirely by volunteers, not employees. We need your funds to pay for software, hardware and hosting around continuous integration and future improvements to the project. Every donation will be spent on making Homebrew better for our users. Please consider a regular donation through GitHub Sponsors, OpenCollective and Patreon.
- Homebrew/brew has no open issues at the time of writing 🎉.
- Homebrew has a brand new brew.sh homepage style.
- BrewUI is Homebrew’s upcoming official graphical interface. It’s not ready for general use yet.
- The
brew-rs
experiment in moving parts of Homebrew’s Ruby frontend to Rust has concluded: benchmarks showed Homebrew’s Rust frontend only ahead on narrow, already-cached bottle fetches, not on representative full installs (pouring bottles, linking, writing metadata and health checks), so the performance focus has moved back to Ruby and to starting useful network and disk I/O sooner. We’ve added an FAQ entry explaining all of this. Our numbers come from honest, fully-compatible comparisons. Not all unofficial Homebrew frontends seem to apply the same rigor to their benchmarks, compatability or security: your mileage with those may vary. - Homebrew is increasingly a “package manager for everywhere”: Homebrew is recommended in Microsoft’s Windows Developer Config for WSL comfort, works well on Bazzite and now supports
winget
inbrew bundle
as a Windows-only feature. - The Homebrew team is aware of the supply-side security issues with other package managers. We’ve taken various steps to mitigate these risks for our users, some existing (e.g. macOS sandboxing, human review on all changes, environment filtering, all package maintainers are Homebrew maintainers), some new (e.g. Linux sandboxing, sandboxing reads of sensitive locations, cooldown from riskier ecosystems). We will continue to monitor the supply-side security landscape and take further steps as needed. See the new Supply Chain Security documentation we’ve added for details.
- Homebrew has documented the principles behind our AI and LLM usage rules in a new Responsible AI Usage page.
- Homebrew has joined the Open Source Resistance and you should too.
Thanks to all our hard-working volunteer maintainers, contributors, sponsors and supporters for getting us this far.
Latest Posts
-
5.1.0
10 Mar 2026
Homebrew 5.1.0 has been released. Homebrew’s most significant changes since 5.0.0 are expanded brew bundle support, brew version-install, new -full formula handling an...
-
5.0.0
12 Nov 2025
Today, I’d like to announce Homebrew 5.0.0. The most significant changes since 4.6.0 are download concurrency by default, official support for Linux ARM64/AArch64, tim...
-
4.6.0
05 Aug 2025
Today, I’d like to announce Homebrew 4.6.0. The most significant changes since 4.5.0 are opt-in concurrent downloads with HOMEBREW_DOWNLOAD_CONCURRENCY, preliminary ma...
-
4.5.0
29 Apr 2025
Today, I’d like to announce Homebrew 4.5.0. The most significant changes since 4.4.0 are major improvements to brew bundle/services, preliminary Linux support for cask...