Today we’re rolling out new features on Facebook to help you find answers to your questions, create fun photos and videos, and make things happen with the help of AI. They can help you get more done with less effort, whether that’s finding real answers from real people, creating content that’s ready to share, or turning a quick idea into something bigger.
Easier Ways to Find Answers
AI Mode is a new way to get answers to your questions right on Facebook thanks to Meta AI. From exploring your Feed to searching for something specific, AI Mode uses Meta AI to give you answers grounded in what people are saying publicly across our apps like in Groups and Reels, so you get real perspectives and experiences rather than a generic list of search results.
It’s another way Meta AI, powered by Muse Spark, is showing up for you in the experiences you already use. Whether you’re searching or diving deeper into content, Meta AI is right there, ready to help.
New Tools to Create and Share
We’re also introducing new editing capabilities that leverage AI to make creative sharing even easier. We’re updating our camera roll sharing suggestions with new collage cutout templates — like friend hangs from the last month — as well as new transition effects to produce smooth, stylized video montages that are ready to share. These suggestions remain opt-in only and can be turned off at any time. Learn more about how this feature works here.
Sometimes your favorite captures can get lost in the shuffle, or you simply don’t have time to create something special. With just a tap, create standout videos and collages you’ll actually want to share.
We’re also introducing new photo presets that make it easy to change your clothing, hair, and accessories with AI. For sports fans, you can easily rep your fandom and virtually wear a team jersey to celebrate. Just tap on the AI Edit icon in stories and select Wear It or go directly to your profile picture and tap Restyle profile picture with AI and select Wardrobe.
Whether you’re looking for answers, creating something to share, or just trying something new, these tools make it easier and more fun to make things happen on Facebook, with the help of AI and the people already here.