Looking for the most recent regular Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle and Strands puzzles.
Today's Connections: Sports Edition has some fun categories, though the green group was a stumper for me. If you're struggling with the puzzle but still want to solve it, read on for hints and the answers.
Connections: Sports Edition is published by The Athletic, the subscription-based sports journalism site owned by The Times. It doesn't appear in the NYT Games app, but it does in The Athletic's own app. Or you can play it for free online.
Read more: NYT Connections: Sports Edition Puzzle Comes Out of Beta
Hints for today's Connections: Sports Edition groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections: Sports Edition puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Big Apple baseball.
Green group hint: Bike race clothing.
Blue group hint: Not the Big 10, but...
Purple group hint: Cowboys wear them.
Answers for today's Connections: Sports Edition groups
Yellow group: New York Yankees, informally.
Green group: Tour de France jerseys.
Blue group: Locations of Big 12 schools.
Purple group: What "boot" might mean.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections: Sports Edition answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is New York Yankees, informally. The four answers are Bronx Bombers, Evil Empire, Pinstripes and Yanks.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is Tour de France jerseys. The four answers are green, polka dot, white and yellow.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is locations of Big 12 schools. The four answers are Boulder, Fort Worth, Manhattan and Waco.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is what "boot" might mean. The four answers are cleat, eject, kick and mishandle.