Remember the days when cable and satellite companies sold premium packages with more exclusive channels? Buying with your provider was probably cheaper than buying the channel separately when you could.
That may feel like a distant memory, but when you think about it, we're living out a blast from the past with streaming bundles. CNET's third annual subscription survey found that streaming is the most popular subscription service (61%), and we're paying an average of $111 per month for subscriptions -- some are paying even more. Major entertainment brands are joining forces to offer several streaming services for a cost that's lower than buying each one individually.
For example, I pay $36 a month for my Disney bundle that includes Hulu, Disney Plus and ESPN Unlimited (all with ads), but it's a good deal for me because I'm a sports fan. Disney not only offers bundles for its own streaming platforms -- which also include Hulu Plus Live TV -- but it also partnered with Warner Bros. Discovery to roll out bundles with HBO Max.
Other entertainment and tech brands follow a similar business model that package multiple services, whether it's related to streaming TV or not. A basic Apple One subscription gives you Apple Music, Apple TV, Apple Arcade and 50 GB of iCloud Plus storage for $20 a month, and you can upgrade if you want more products in your plan. The Peacock and Apple TV bundle has two price tiers if you subscribe directly through either service (with more options available if you have Xfinity). You can check out more bundles if you have a cord-cutter live TV streaming service plan from providers like Fubo or DirecTV, which both give you access to select platforms at no extra cost.
But is it really in our best interest to bundle services when possible? Kourtnee Jackson, CNET's streaming expert to see if it's another gimmick for our hard-earned money or if it's a real money saver.
When does bundling make sense?
Whether you bundle your streaming services depends on your personal preferences. If you look at it from a company's perspective, bundling works well because it allows a brand to reach as many potential subscribers as possible, helping to expand its customer base and even tap into a pool of customers from the companies it's partnered with. For you, it can be a money-saver, and as a plus, your billing is handled in one place for multiple subscriptions, says Jackson.
"A bundle can be a great way to save money if you're actually using all of the services included in the package," said Jackson. "Otherwise, you're just wasting cash on a bunch of channels or platforms you're not even watching."
CNET found that's the case for some subscribers. On average, US adults waste an average $21 a month on unused subscriptions, adding up to $252 annually.
Saving money sounds good, but first, Jackson recommends making sure you'll use each service enough to justify how much you're spending monthly or annually for the bundle. If you're only signing up for a bundle to watch one season of a show and will only use it periodically, you may consider signing up for a trial to watch the entire season before the trial ends. Or you may sign up for one month, then cancel before the next billing cycle to pay less over time to avoid wasting money on months you don't use. In these scenarios, buying into a bundle may not be the best choice for you.
Shop around for the best deal on subscription bundles
Just like you may compare deals for the latest iPhone, TV or MacBook, shop around for the right streaming package. Jackson recommends exploring beyond what's marketed, like a bundling ad on your social media or email. Instead, look at the streaming perks that come with other subscriptions -- for example, Instacart Plus, Walmart Plus or your cellphone provider. Verizon offers discounted streaming bundles for its customers that lets you choose between Disney Plus, ESPN Plus and Hulu for $10 a month or Netflix and HBO Max for $13 a month. And T-Mobile gives you free streaming subscriptions, depending on which plan you have.
Bundling streaming services isn't always straightforward
It's usually easy to cancel subscription services you don't want, but depending on what company your package is with, you may need to follow a few extra steps to set up or cancel your subscription. Or, depending on your needs and preferences, you may decide that a standalone subscription is best. Jackson shared a few wise words to know before you sign up for a streaming bundle.
- Read the fine print. Check to see if the bundle requires anything additional, like a wireless or internet plan.
- Double-check whether you need to cancel your standalone subscriptions before bundling to make it easier to manage and avoid overpayment.
- Make sure you know what's offered in your streaming service bundle. Some bundles may still have ads or may not offer 4K.
- Ask yourself whether you'll use each app enough to justify what you'll spend on the bundle or if you'll end up keeping it longer than you planned because you forgot to cancel it.