Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) Using Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks for Dynamic Noises
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The existing Generative Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (GFANC) method generates a suitable control filter based on the current noise frame. This reactive design aims to estimate a control filter that is optimal for the present frame rather than the upcoming one. Consequently, it suffers from an inherent tracking lag and lacks the predictive capability to handle rapidly varying noises. To address this limitation, we propose the Predictive Fixed-Filter Active Noise Control (PFANC) method with a proactive control paradigm in this paper. In the PFANC method, multiple consecutive noise frames are processed by a Convolutional Recurrent Neural Network (CRNN) to predict the next-frame control filter. By utilizing temporal correlations across noise frames to anticipate the control filter in advance, the PFANC method can effectively track dynamic noise changes. Furthermore, the theoretical analysis based on a high-order Markov chain shows that incorporating multiple noise frames enhances the prediction of the control filter. Numerical simulations with linear and logarithmic chirp signals, as well as real-world dynamic noises, validate the effectiveness of the PFANC method and its superiority over GFANC and its variations. The PFANC method also exhibits good transferability across different acoustic paths.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.