looking for new noise-canceling cans for your summer vacation, earbuds for the gym, or luxury designs to take the edge off your commute? These Prime Day headphone deals are for you. Amazon’s annual sales bonanza always delivers on audio deals, but to make life easier, we’ve curated the best Prime Day headphone deals with the lowest prices, and only recommend products our experts have tried and tested themselves.
Also be sure to browse our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
Deals on Headphones
It will be a while before you see Sony’s shiny new $650 1000X The Collexion discounted, but don’t worry, because the on-sale Sony WH-1000XM6 remain one of the finest noise-canceling headphones ever. They’re our favorite headphones for blocking out even the most disruptive background noise, while also offering superb audio performance no matter which genre of music you’re listening to.
A cheaper, poppier follow-up to Nothing’s superb Headphone (1), these stylish noise-canceling headphones look great and boast a full-bodied sound profile that’s perfect for pop and electronic music. There’s a slick app for adjusting sound profiles, battery life can hit 135 hours with ANC off, and there’s even USB-C audio cable included for hi-res listening.
It’s a testament to the quality of the Bose QuietComfort Ultra that they remain one of the best buys despite being over two years old. They’re supremely comfortable and have impressive spatialized audio, and because they’re Bose, they come with sensationally good, customizable noise cancellation technology.
Earbud Deals
If you’re wedded to the Apple ecosystem and live for seamless integration and instant pairing, the AirPods Pro 3 are the best wireless earbuds for you, especially when they’re on sale. The latest generation has up to eight hours of battery, ANC is twice as good, and there’s also heart-rate sensing, workout tracking, and translation.
Better looking than the AirPods they’re aping, Nothing’s transparent little buds are a great buy, even at twice the price. The 11 millimeter dynamic drivers boast an open, natural midrange that’s impossible not to enjoy, while ANC delivers quiet better than most budget options. Sound quality won’t worry Sony or Bowers & Wilkins, but they’re a classy design with great fit, intuitive stem controls, app EQ, and fast pairing.
The most comfortable non-stem earbuds this reviewer has ever used, with a tiny case as pocketable as AirPods. Google updated the software back in 2025 to add adaptive audio, protection against loud noise, improved Gemini integration and head gesture control that’s not as silly as it sounds. A classy choice with the best integration for Android users.
Deals on Sport Headphones
Featuring the same H2 chip that powers the AirPods Pro 2, the PowerBeats Pro 2 impressed our reviewer, who praised the “crazy comfy” fit and dynamic sound. There’s also ANC and transparency modes for both road safety and gym sanity, wireless charging, IP57 durability, full-on bass-forward audio quality, and built-in heart rate monitoring.