Mathematics > Numerical Analysis
Title:A Quadratic Order Reduction -- Gaussian Process Ordinary Differential Equation framework for the inference of Large Continuous Dynamical Systems
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Forecasting the evolution of complex dynamical systems remains a fundamentally challenging task, primarily due to pronounced nonlinear interactions, high-dimensional state spaces, and the concomitant requirement for rigorous and reliable uncertainty quantification. Contemporary reduced-order modelling (ROM) frameworks frequently exhibit inherent trade-offs among predictive accuracy, numerical stability, and interpretability, and thus often fail to achieve an optimal balance among these competing objectives. To address these limitations, we propose a framework for forecasting complex dynamical systems via a kernel autonomous ordinary differential equation approach based on Gaussian Processes and Quadratic Order Model Reduction. Our base method, the Gaussian Process Ordinary Differential Equations model, allows accurate short-term forecasting with uncertainty quantification, and it provably converges to the real autonomous equation in the smooth case. We integrate it with quadratic order reduced-order modelling and sphere projection for learning the latent dynamics efficiently while preserving stability. Numerical experiments demonstrate that our full model outperforms ROM forecasting methods such as Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition, Bagging Optimised Dynamic Mode Decomposition and Linear and Nonlinear Disambiguation Optimisation in terms of accuracy or computational costs. These results demonstrate the potential of the framework as a robust and stable tool for forecasting complex dynamical systems with rigorous uncertainty quantification.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.