Computer Science > Neural and Evolutionary Computing
Title:Genetic Algorithm Based Coordination and Optimization Model for Generation Grid Load Storage in Active Distribution Networks
View PDFAbstract:Create an optimization framework that combines fuzzy logic and genetic algorithms for risk assessment and coordination of generation, grid connection, load, and energy storage facilities in active distribution networks. In order to capture the system uncertainties caused by weather factors and dynamic user demands, this project uses fuzzy set representation to model renewable energy generation, load curves, and market prices. In the evolutionary process, genetic algorithms introduce fuzzy elements into system management, adjusting thru penalty factors to improve stability and seeking better scheduling or power dispatch solutions. At the same time, by penalizing uncertainty and constraint violations, the fitness function of the hybrid model aims to optimize the expected operational costs; it can produce feasible and economical results under unknown parameter conditions. Under conditions with a large supply of renewable energy and installed energy storage systems, simulation results for the IEEE-69 power system indicate that the fuzzy genetic algorithm strategy effectively reduces technical constraints compared to deterministic optimization schemes. The total investment remains at a similar level. Other data indicate that thru fuzzy reasoning optimization, unreasonable choices or impossible situations are avoided during the network adaptation process. This framework-based technical approach helps to construct an effective computational scheme that is aware of uncertainty in its outputs. This will provide a scientific basis for the uncertainty assessment in distribution network planning.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.