Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Brain2Text Decoding Model Reveals the Neural Mechanisms of Visual Semantic Processing
View PDFAbstract:Decoding sensory experiences from neural activity to reconstruct human-perceived visual stimuli and semantic content remains a challenge in neuroscience and artificial intelligence. Despite notable progress in current brain decoding models, a critical gap still persists in their systematic integration with established neuroscientific theories and the exploration of underlying neural mechanisms. Here, we present a novel framework that directly decodes fMRI signals into textual descriptions of viewed natural images. Our novel deep learning model, trained without visual information, achieves state-of-the-art semantic decoding performance, generating meaningful captions that capture the core semantic content of complex scenes. Neuroanatomical analysis reveals the critical role of higher-level visual cortices, including MT+ complex, ventral stream visual cortex, and inferior parietal cortex, in visual semantic processing. Furthermore, category-specific analysis demonstrates nuanced neural representations for semantic dimensions like animacy and motion. This work provides a more direct and interpretable framework to the brain's semantic decoding, offering a powerful new methodology for probing the neural basis of complex semantic processing, refining the understanding of the distributed semantic network, and potentially developing brain-inspired language models.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.