Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle has a varied mix of difficulty. I really enjoyed the blue group, once I made the connection. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Keep at it!
Green group hint: Prep to party.
Blue group hint: Year of the goat.
Purple group hint: Blooming buds.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Staying power.
Green group: Get ready for a night out.
Blue group: Chinese zodiac animals.
Purple group: Flowers.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is staying power. The four answers are legs, momentum, stamina and traction.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is get ready for a night out. The four answers are accessorize, change, primp and shower.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is Chinese zodiac animals. The four answers are dog, dragon, horse and snake.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is flowers. The four answers are anemone, larkspur, monkshood and phlox.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.