People often split their attention between watching TV and scrolling through social media on their phones. Now, more viewers will have the option to browse through social media directly on their TV.
Starting Monday, Instagram for TV is landing on Samsung Smart TVs in the US. The feature, which is already available on Amazon Fire TV and Google TV, lets you browse through Instagram content like Stories, Reels and Channels on a bigger screen. It's available on Samsung TV models from 2020 or newer.
The idea is to make it easier for people to watch content together. Although given how personalized each Instagram user's algorithm tends to be, it'll be interesting to see how often people use the feature in larger group settings. But it could be a way to more comfortably browse through content without craning your neck over your phone.
"Whether you're catching up on your favorite creators, laughing at reels with friends or discovering something new with family, Instagram for TV makes it easier to enjoy the videos you love on the biggest screen in the home," Instagram said in a blog post.
Instagram is testing additional features that could expand its TV offering. One potential addition is a dedicated home for horizontal videos. Instagram says this can give "creators more ways to reach audiences" and be an easy way to watch content designed for a TV screen.
It's also a move that could encroach on YouTube's dominance in horizontal video. Last year, YouTube CEO Neal Mohan noted in a blog post that YouTube is viewed on TVs more than on mobile devices in the US. A Nielsen report also found that YouTube has the largest share of TV viewing among media companies, topping the likes of Netflix, Paramount and NBCUniversal. It's not surprising that Instagram may want to tap into those numbers and find audiences everywhere they are.
Other formats Instagram is testing for TV include long-form video, livestreams and episodic series. It's also looking to add an option to cast Reels from your phone to your Samsung TV -- a capability that's already available on Google TV and Fire TV.
"Creators are helping shape the future of Instagram for TV," Instagram noted. "As we explore longer-form, episodic and live formats, we're working closely with creators to understand what works best on TV and how these experiences can complement the ways people already use Instagram."