Norton Antivirus is the only anti-virus software I've ever used, in part because many years ago I switched to Linux, which eliminates the need for antivirus software. If you're still on macOS or Windows, though, Norton Antivirus is still a solid choice. None of these services is something anyone is excited to run, but they can save you bacon if you make a bad decision downloading questionable files or clicking links you shouldn't have. The best way to stay protected without spending a fortune is to use a Norton coupon code to get yourself a deal.
Norton Coupons: Up to 58% off 360 and Antivirus Plans
While I’ve only ever used the Antivirus offering, the real way to save is to bundle several services and use a coupon code for the lot. With Norton that means Norton 360, which gets you the Antivirus, malware, ransomware, and hacking protection, along with a VPN and dark web monitoring, for up to three devices. You also get a password manager and 2GB of online storage. With this Norton coupon code, you get all that $40 for the first year, which is about the same as paying for a VPN alone. Norton 360 Deluxe gets you everything that comes with the regular version, but it works with five devices and gives you 50GB of online storage.
Get Unbeatable Norton With LifeLock Protection From $8.33 per Month
LifeLock is Norton’s usual online protection suite, but adds up to $1 million in potential coverage if you experience financial loss due to identity theft. With this Norton coupon code, Norton 360 with LifeLock is just $8.33 per month.
Norton Anti Virus Promo Codes: 50% Off 360 Antivirus Plus
If you want to get (and stay) serious about your privacy and protection, and the overall health and longevity of your computer, I’d suggest investing in an anti-virus protection plan for your whole setup. With Norton 360 Antivirus Plus, you’ll get powerful antivirus protection for your device, including AI-powered Scam Protection, Password Manager, and 2 GB Cloud Backup. And you can get even more peace of mind with a 60-day money back guarantee. Best of all, Norton 360 Antivirus Plus is 50% off right now, taking it from $60 per year to only $30—which works out to being just $2.50 per month—a small investment worth so much more in protection and peace of mind.