Computer Science > Robotics
Title:The N2D Haptic Glove: A Multi-Finger Glove for 2D Directional Force Feedback for Contact Rich Manipulation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Humans rely on directional fingertip forces to probe and regulate contact during manipulation, yet most wearable haptic gloves render only vibration or single-axis force, leaving force direction ambiguous. Without directional cues, users must infer contact force from vision alone, often leading to over-pressing, inconsistent control, and reduced precision in robotic teleoperation. We present the N2D Haptic Glove, a multi-finger wearable device that renders planar flexion-extension fingertip forces using capstan-drive transmissions for high-transparency force feedback. Through benchtop validations and a user study involving haptic teleoperation of a robotic arm and hand, we demonstrate that compared to visual-only and single-axis haptic baselines, planar fingertip feedback significantly reduces contact force error during precise manipulation, improves trial-to-trial consistency, and enhances overall user experience in axial probing tasks. These findings establish the N2D Haptic Glove and directional finger-based haptics devices as a promising modality for contact-rich teleoperation, immersive virtual reality simulations, and robot learning from demonstrations. N2D Haptic Glove's hardware and software system will be fully open-sourced at \href{this https URL}{this https URL}.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.