Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle changed at the last minute. The Times had another puzzle scheduled for today, but moved it to June 30 at the last minute. And if you're a fan of a certain New York team that just won a basketball championship, you can see why. They substituted today's puzzle, which features some words relating to that winning team. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: The 11th letter.
Green group hint: I'm behind you!
Blue group hint: Sit down.
Purple group hint: Rock on.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Featuring silent and pronounced "K"s.
Green group: Endorse.
Blue group: Kinds of chairs.
Purple group: Words repeated in hit song titles.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is featuring silent and pronounced "K"s. The four answers are jackknife, knapsack, Knicks and knock-knock.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is endorse. The four answers are back, bolster, champion and support.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is kinds of chairs. The four answers are beanbag, recliner, rocker and stool.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is words repeated in hit song titles. The four answers are Jumpin', Louis, New York and Rebel.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.