Computer Science > Robotics
Title:YUBI: Yielding Universal Bidigital Interface for Bimanual Dexterous Manipulation at Scale
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We introduce Yielding Universal Bidigital Interface (YUBI), a finger-aligned gripper designed to enable intuitive, ergonomic, and scalable data collection for bimanual dexterous manipulation. While handheld data collection systems such as Universal Manipulation Interface (UMI) enable affordable data collection, their bulky pistol-grip designs can pose ergonomic and usability challenges for fine-grained, dexterous manipulation tasks. To address this, YUBI presents a distinct design principle: yielding, finger-driven actuation that directly maps human finger movements to gripper jaw motion. Using the YUBI devices, we set up a data collection system with integrated VR-based 6 DoF tracking of the gripper, ensuring high-fidelity trajectory data acquisition. We curate a UMI-based dataset of unprecedented scale: 8,434 hours across 1.20M episodes and 119 tasks. Experiments show that YUBI offers advantages over the UMI gripper in versatility for complex bimanual tasks, dexterity, and operational efficiency. A single policy trained on the YUBI dataset transfers across multiple bimanual robots (UR, Franka, and ELEY) simply by mounting the gripper on each platform, confirming that the collected data are directly executable as policy supervision. We release the gripper hardware, data-collection software, and dataset as one integrated stack, offering the open community a reproducible path to large-scale data acquisition for advancing robotic foundation models.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.