The summer sale extravaganza has come early this year, and while this is one of many sale events you'll see between now and the holidays, these Prime Day vacuum deals are worth taking a look at.
There's an impressive range of vacuums on sale, from some of my favorite cordless vacuums and Dyson powerhouses, to robot vacuums and handheld vacuums. You can get my favorite cordless vacuum, the Shark PowerDetect ($300) for $100 cheaper than usual, or the already affordable Bissell PowerClean FurFinder ($150) with an extra discount. The best robot vacuum we've tried, the Shark PowerDetect UV Reveal ($850) also has a fantastic price tag this week for how powerful it is, and you can get great wet vacuums like the Narwal S30 Pro ($330) on sale too.
All of these models and more that we've tested and love are on sale right now. Here are all the Prime Day vacuum deals you don't want to miss. Also be sure to browse our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
Best Cordless Vacuum Deals
The whole reason to shop for a vacuum on Prime Day is to get a great deal. The Bissell PowerClean FurFinder is already a great price for a cordless vacuum with its power and attachments, and it's often on sale at this low price. It has 200W of power, a bright headlight to spot dust and debris, a handful of attachments including the FurFinder head for sucking up pet hair, and a HEPA filtration system. It can stand up on its own, too, which comes in handy.
My all-time favorite cordless vacuum is also on sale. The Shark PowerDetect is a popular cordless vacuum for a reason, from its powerful suction, bendable neck, large dust cup that's easy to empty, and HEPA filtration. This vacuum outperformed a Dyson in my tests with sand and cereal on carpet, and works great as a hand vacuum, too. It's already a well-priced vacuum considering all it includes, and it's even better now with this $100 discount during Prime Day.
This Dyson is not only powerful, but now, it has a fantastic price too. I usually don't see it for this cheap, but now that Dyson launched new vacuum models, it's likely going to have a better sale price going forward. So, while the Dyson Gen5Detect isn't technically the top-of-the-line model anymore, it's still impressively powerful with 280AW of suction and has a brighter laser than Dyson's older models. It also has a true power button rather than the trigger button that models like the V15 have. The addition of the HEPA filtration and its powerful suction makes it a go-to option for homes with carpet and pet hair.
Best Cordless Wet Vac Deals
If you want a vacuum that can wet mop or vacuum your stairs, this version of the Dyson V15 Detect can do both. The V15s Detect Submarine comes with a special Submarine head that turns it into a wet vacuum for your hard floors, and then still comes with Dyson's excellent cleaner heads for dry vacuuming: the Digital Motorbar head for carpets and rugs, and the Fluffy Optic head for a quick sweep on hard floors. It's truly an all-in-one device, and while this is a sale price we do see from time to time, it's still a worthy one for everything you'll get.
Best Robot Vacuum Deals
I don't like AI being forced into products unnecessarily, but I have to admit this robot vacuum's built-in AI features impressed me. The Shark PowerDetect UV Reveal uses a UV light and a camera to spot stains, and the AI will analyze the footage to find where it should go to scrub the floors. Once the initial clean is complete, it will announce to you that it's found stains and is headed back out to “viciously attack them.” It also does a good job on hard floors, carpets, and rugs alike, but sadly can only learn one floor at a time. Still, I've yet to be this impressed with any other robot vacuum's cleaning job, especially for the price (even more so while on sale!)
This is another great robot vacuum with AI that you'll actually be impressed with. Former WIRED reviewer Adrienne So found the Dreame X50 Ultra would track and recognize spots in her home that would get the dirtiest (for her, it was in front of her dog's bed) and remind her to run the vacuum to clean them. It also has side wands for edge cleaning and a large capacity docking station for all that debris it's reminding you to let it clean. It's got a nice discount as well right now for Prime Day.
More Deals I've Spotted
I'll be looking for more great vacuum deals all week long. Here's a few more you might want to check out.
- Black + Decker Dustbuster Flex for $74 ($56 Off): This is a great hand vacuum thanks to the charging stand and long hose that make it easy to use in cars (and especially deep trunks). The base keeps the vacuum charged (and thank goodness since it only has a 15 minute battery life, so you'll want an easy charging setup) and stores its attachments, too.
- Dyson Car+Boat for $229 ($71 Off): If you're looking for a great hand vacuum, this Dyson model has impressive power and battery life for a handheld. It's one of the cheapest ways to get a Dyson vacuum into your home, although, Dyson stick vacuums can also double as a handheld. Still, it's a nice little discount on an already affordable (for a Dyson) vacuum.
- Ecovacs Deebot X12 OmniCyclone for $900 ($500 Off): Ecovacs is the parent company of both Deebot and Yeedi, but Yeedi is usually cheaper with some similar features. Still, we've liked past Deebots robot vacuums we've tried, and this is a good deal on one of its premium robot vacuums. I haven't tested it yet, but I like that you can mark spots in the app that are extra dirty so that the robot vacuum knows to use its pre-spray on the stains and mess before it starts mopping.
- Ecovacs Deebot T90 Pro Omni for $500 ($400 Off): If you're looking for more options in the $500 range, the Deebot T90 Pro Omni is also on sale for Prime Day to bring it down into that range. It's usually on sale for $700, so this is a better deal than usual. It's another one I have yet to test, but promises a self-cleaning roller mop, edge cleaning, and impressive 30,000 Pa of suction.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.