Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Sub-Semantic Image Segmentation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Images can be segmented based on visual cues (i.e., texture segmentation) or into objects (i.e., semantic segmentation). We propose a new category of sub-semantic image segmentation that blurs the line between the two. In sub-semantic image segmentation, language is not used to name whole objects. Instead, it is used to partition an image into stable appearance patterns that can be described by language. To do that, we couple a general-purpose vision-language model to SAM 3, a promptable segmentation backbone whose native text pathway can ground rich descriptions into masks. Simple coupling fails for a number of reasons that we identify in the paper, and we overcome them by introducing DETECTURE that resolves three concrete failure modes -- language leakage between texture regions, prompt competition inside the segmentation backbone, and semantic distortion at the language-to-mask interface. Since there is no dataset of sub-semantic image segmentation, we introduce one, termed TextureADE. The new dataset is derived from the ADE20K dataset using a system we designed. We compare DETECTURE to a number of baselines and find that it achieves the strongest performance on several datasets using different metrics. Code is available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.