Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:MemoVAD: Resource-Efficient Video Anomaly Detection via Dynamic Semantic Memory in Edge Computing Scenarios
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Deploying Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) in real-world surveillance faces a fundamental tension between the demand for high-level semantics to ensure effectiveness and the limited computational resources of edge devices. Vision-Language Models (VLMs) provide rich open-vocabulary semantics, but their latency and computational cost preclude on-device deployment. To address the challenge, we propose MemoVAD, an edge-cloud collaborative framework that selectively incorporates VLM semantics into streaming VAD. MemoVAD runs most inference on the edge with a lightweight detector and a causal Temporal Context Encoder (TCE) to model temporal dependencies. Specifically, we introduce an Uncertainty-Aware Gating (UAG) policy grounded in Subjective Logic to model perceived uncertainty and query the cloud-based VLM only for high-uncertainty and semantically novel clips. Besides, a Dynamic Semantic Memory (DSM) is designed to cache VLM-verified prototypes for efficient retrieval, enabling the edge model to progressively incorporate VLM-level semantics via a semantic adapter. Experiments on UCF-Crime and XD-Violence datasets via a real edge device show that MemoVAD substantially reduces communication overhead while surpassing state-of-the-art performance.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.