Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Outage Detection in Self-Healing Smart Grids Using Reinforcement Learning with Spectral Graph Neural Networks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Self-healing smart grids can quickly adjust their network configuration during outages to minimize power disruptions. During an outage, several actions can be taken, such as network reconfiguration through switching operations and emergency load shedding. However, traditional machine learning methods for outage mitigation are not well suited for smart grids due to their slow response time and high computational cost. To address these challenges, recent studies have explored reinforcement learning to automatically perform network reconfiguration. In these approaches, the control policy is typically modeled using a graph neural network (GNN). However, conventional GNNs operate in the spatial domain and may fail to capture important relationships in the frequency domain. Frequency-domain information is particularly useful for modeling global structural patterns and system-wide interactions in power networks. In this paper, we propose a spectral graph reinforcement learning framework for outage management in distribution networks to enhance system resilience. Our model learns the optimal power restoration policy using a spectral graph neural network. We evaluate the proposed method on three modified IEEE test systems: the 13-bus, 34-bus, and 123-bus networks. Experimental results show that our approach achieves near-optimal performance in real time and generalizes well across a wide range of outage scenarios.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.