Solving the "Zork" mystery
19 May 2026 - ...and finishing the game while at it.
It's been two years since my last Zork adventure and I finally got time to finish it. But before I restored my last save, I checked my blog notes and there was one "opened issue" which I wanted to address.
I glossed over problematic trivia about Zork which says, that "zork" was a jargon word for unfinished program in MIT Dynamic Modeling Group back in 70's. I also pointed out, that Wikipedia does not provide source to this information, to which one reader messaged me that I am wrong. And I was!
For some reason I remembered that this information wasn't right. So I spent some time abusing the Wikipedia API and mining in edit history and I found that this information appeared for the first time in the 2001 edit without any source. It stayed like that until the October 2014 edit (13 years later!) when it got the source number 1 quoted above. Since then, there were 41 different edits, of which the most interesting one was December 2016 edit in which the information got 4 different sources of which 3 didn't say anything about "zork" being used for work in progress stuff, only as general nonsense word.
Source 19: Infocoms publication "Down From the Top of Its Game: The Story of Infocom" from 2000. (Link) directly quotes the interview from source 15. And then there is the Tim Andersons' version in source 1.
I did remembered this contradiction of sources 18 and 1, and lack of information from sources 15 and 19, and this time I wouldn't let it slide. I searched for other Zork related documents and found one more material not exactly in line with Tims' version.
No author is named under the article or from the redaction but it's the same Infocom owned medium, which will one year later published Tim Andersons' version.
Then I found this excelent article by Nick Monfort, Post Position A Note on the Word “Zork” (Link). He focused on the etimology of the word and searched/speculated how the authors could came up with it. There were 4 major hits one including the most well known "zorch" MIT semi-jargon word for burning stuff. I don't want to spoil the rest of the article as it's one of the better reading materials on the net, but I will include one quick teaser in a form of a picture.
a zork pterodactyl chopper... you can't make this shit up
Let's focus. I tried to get the first hand testimony now. Lebling, Anderson, Blank, Daniels, the implementors, were unreachable to me, so I wrote to only two people I knew, that were on MIT in 1970's. The Last true hacker Richard M. Stallman and Good-news-bad-news Richard P. Gabriel. I don't want to take out any content of our correspondence without their allowence, but none of them heard the word "zork" in the context of unfinished program.
You can find a lot of stuff online about the word itself, but only one quote mentions that there was some kind of habit of naming unfinished code a "zork". Why do I care? To me it just seems weird how could game with such an impact on home computing world not carry over this jargon to this day. Especially considering the fate of other jargon words of the era like "hack" or sooner mentioned "foobar", which didn't got boost from any commercial company behind them.
I would love to get a clear proof that it was a real jargon word, not case of Chandler Bing's one-person slang, so computing history could include this term proudly among other computer babble. Anyway, my call from last time stands. If there is anybody who can confirm that it was general habbit to name your unfinished code a "zork", please write me an email. I will either propose the Wikipedia edit or message to ESR to add it into the hackers' jargon file.
In a meantime, I am editing my Let's play Zork blog to fluently continue with the rest of my playtrough, so in few days (maybe weeks) you can check out how I struggled with the mirror room and other stuff. As much as I felt let down after my first run, I enjoyed this one good. I am definetly going to pick the sequel next time.
Update
18 Jun 2026 - Finally!After almost a month without any proof nor reaction from the authors I proposed the Wikipedia edit in the articles talk section. I am happy to announce that correction was made and the article finally informs reader that there was no general habbit of naming unfinished software a Zork and that it's only Tim Andersons claim.
In other news, I still didn't updated the Zork I article with the rest of the gameplay because I got stuck in Zork II which currently eats all my time. Sorry about that.
* The beautiful title picture is courtesy of Gino D'Achille, 1980, which I found in this cool blog.