Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:MOSAIC: Mobile Object Segmentation under Adverse Imaging Conditions for Rapid L-PBF Keyhole Behavior Characterization
View PDFAbstract:In laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) processes, the rapid evolution of gas and fluid interactions complicates our ability to properly monitor or control the process, with unstable keyholes leading to porosity and spatter formation. High-speed operando x-ray imaging of the keyhole has been used to better understand the impact of these interactions on the monitoring and control of the L-PBF process. MOSAIC, a Mobile Object Segmentation algorithm for experiments under Adverse Imaging Conditions, is designed to perform rapid analysis of keyhole dynamics during active beamline experimentation without needing time consuming manual labeling or model training. Validation studies performed on 12 unique samples proved the robustness of MOSAIC with an average F1 score of 0.894 and a precision of 0.953 when compared to manually segmented images, performing equally or better than the SAM and YOLO machine learning methods tested. MOSAIC is efficient, processing frames cropped to a moving window approximately 150x250 pixels at 19.9 milliseconds per image on CPU, compared to 54 and 5284 milliseconds per image for inference on CPU for YOLO and SAM models.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.