Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:CSWinUNETR: Segmentation of Thin Anatomical Structures in Medical Images
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Accurate segmentation of thin, tortuous anatomical structures, such as retinal vessels, cerebral vasculature, and facial wrinkles, remains challenging due to low contrast, frequent discontinuities, and severe class imbalance. Although recent convolutional and Transformer-based models have improved performance, they often yield fragmented predictions and fail to recover fine branches. We propose CSWinUNETR, a general-purpose backbone for 2D and 3D thin-structure segmentation. It employs cross-shaped stripe self-attention to model long-range principal-axis context and incorporates cyclic shifts to enhance information exchange across stripes. To better preserve fine-grained details, we further introduce a detail-enhanced multi-scale self-attention module that aggregates contextual features from multi-resolution representations. In addition, we propose sparse-control dynamic snake convolution, which reconstructs reliable dense curvilinear kernels from sparsely predicted control points to better follow tortuous geometry. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks across ophthalmology, neurovascular imaging, and dermatology demonstrate that CSWinUNETR consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods without task-specific post-processing or topology-aware losses. The code is available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.