Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Unleashing Correlation and Continuity for Hyperspectral Reconstruction from RGB Images
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Reconstructing Hyperspectral Images (HSI) from RGB images can yield high spatial resolution HSI at a lower cost, demonstrating significant application potential. This paper reveals that local correlation and global continuity of the spectral characteristics are crucial for HSI reconstruction tasks. Therefore, we fully explore these inter-spectral relationships and propose a Correlation and Continuity Network (CCNet) for HSI reconstruction from RGB images. For the correlation of local spectrum, we introduce the Group-wise Spectral Correlation Modeling (GrSCM) module, which efficiently establishes spectral band similarity within a localized range. For the continuity of global spectrum, we design the Neighborhood-wise Spectral Continuity Modeling (NeSCM) module, which employs memory units to recursively model the progressive variation characteristics at the global level. In order to explore the inherent complementarity of these two modules, we design the Patch-wise Adaptive Fusion (PAF) module to efficiently integrate global continuity features into the spectral features in a patch-wise adaptive manner. These innovations enhance the quality of reconstructed HSI. We perform comprehensive comparison and ablation experiments on the mainstream datasets NTIRE2022 and NTIRE2020 for the spectral reconstruction task. Compared to the current advanced spectral reconstruction algorithms, our designed algorithm achieves State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) performance.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.