Formula One is trying to reach a broader audience this season: It streamed its first race on Netflix; the latest season of the great docu-series F1: Drive to Survive is currently available on both Apple TV and Netflix; and now, another first, you can stream this weekend's Austrian Grand Prix for free on Apple TV, no subscription required.
(And purely from a "reaching a broader audience" perspective, it also can't hurt that one of the most successful drivers on the circuit, Lewis Hamilton, happens to be dating reality TV superstar Kim Kardashian, who has been showing up to many of his races.)
Hamilton, who drives for Ferrari, is currently No. 2 in the drivers' standings this season behind Kimi Antonelli of Mercedes. Rounding out the top five drivers in the standings this season are George Russell, Charles Leclerc and Lando Norris. You can catch them and the rest of this season's top drivers competing in this weekend's Grand Prix.
Per usual, a Formula 1 race is actually a full weekend of practice and qualification races that culminate in the Grand Prix, and you'll be able to watch every race of the weekend from Friday's practices through Sunday's main event. Here's what you need to know if you want to tune in.
When is the next Formula 1 race?
The Austrian Grand Prix, which takes place at Red Bull Ring in the Styrian hills of Austria, is scheduled for Sunday, June 28, at 9 a.m. ET (6 a.m. PT, 2 p.m. BST). Practices and a qualifying race are scheduled for Friday and Saturday.
How to watch the Austrian Grand Prix for free
As of this racing season, Apple TV is the streaming home of F1 races, and fans can catch every race on the platform included with their subscription. This weekend, Apple TV is opening things up to nonsubscribers, too. Anyone can watch all five events at the Red Bull Ring, including Sunday's Grand Prix. You'll just need the Apple TV app, which you can download to your smart TV or streaming device.
Austrian Grand Prix weekend race schedule
All times ET.
Friday, June 26
- Practice 1: 7:30 a.m. on Apple TV
- Practice 2: 11 a.m. on Apple TV
Saturday, June 27
- Practice 3: 6:30 a.m. on Apple TV
- Qualifying: 10 a.m. on Apple TV
Sunday, June 28
- Austrian Grand Prix: 9 a.m. on Apple TV