Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:CELEUS: Certifiable and Efficient LLM Evaluation via E-Processes
View PDFAbstract:Can we trust evaluation scores to capture an LLM's true real-world performance? Certifiable evaluation answers this question by providing guarantee for LLM evaluation. In particular, existing methods sequentially curate evaluation samples and keep updating confidence intervals (CIs) that cover the true performance with high probability (e.g., 95%) until some conditions are satisfied, e.g., the CI width reaches a target precision. However, existing methods are not generally anytime-valid: the claimed coverage (e.g., 95%) may fail when CIs are repeatedly updated and used to decide when to stop, leaving a gap between theoretical rigor and practice. This paper bridges this gap by proposing Celeus, a Certifiable framework for Efficient LLM evaluation, which leverages E-processes to build anytime-valid CIs. Concretely, we propose signals that combine two ingredients: (i) Uncertainty-guided sampling to select informative samples for evaluation, and (ii) Surrogate-assisted approximations for unevaluated samples. We prove that such signals remain unbiased for the evaluation score conditional on the past, enabling statistically-grounded and anytime-valid $e$-process CIs. More importantly, the two ingredients reduce estimation variance and help reach the target precision with fewer evaluated samples. We also prove that CIs obtained by Celeus can shrink at a near-parametric rate up to logarithmic factors and analyze the oracle variance-optimal sampling rule that motivates the empirical uncertainty-guided one. Experiments show that Celeus reaches the target precision using 54-62% fewer evaluated samples than baselines, while preserving anytime-valid coverage.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.