America has been expecting an influx of tourists from around the world for the 2026 FIFA World Cup. And while we knew that having thousands of travelers visiting would be a little crowded, I'm not sure anyone could have predicted that it would also be so much fun.
Visitors are posting their first impressions of the US and all the unexpected things that they've discovered on their travels. Judging from their reviews of our fast food, theme parks and gas stations, one might say we Americans take these things for granted.
One German visitor who goes by FreddyLA7 on X, has gone viral, posting about his rose-colored takes on his trip across the South. Freddy's posted rave reviews of everything from Wendy's to Buc-ee's and Waffle House, which he rates 10/10, delighting thousands online who love his positive attitude. (He's also not wasting time, visiting six states in six days leading up to the World Cup).
Lmao how am I supposed to choose from all of this? This is overwhelming me😭😭😭 https://t.co/PBMhyA5BLt pic.twitter.com/Rq3Jel7y3G
— Freddy🇩🇪 (@FreddyLA7) June 8, 2026
Just had our first Waffle House experience at 1am. Great food, great prices, and friendly staff. 10/10, we will be coming back.😋 pic.twitter.com/QHgftpqfoX
— Freddy🇩🇪 (@FreddyLA7) June 8, 2026
Fast food isn't the only thing Freddy's been posting about. Fans also love his impressions of the cities he's visited.
Atlanta is so green it’s crazy. It feels like you’re in a forest the whole time. pic.twitter.com/o8wBzBoR6U
— Freddy🇩🇪 (@FreddyLA7) June 7, 2026
Made the tweet while sitting on this bench https://t.co/7ZCxed4Y4E pic.twitter.com/sEcck51x0B
— Freddy🇩🇪 (@FreddyLA7) June 11, 2026
A Swedish X user, ElsaThora, is reveling in the little things during her trip: fire trucks, ranch dressing and Indiana.
Why are the fire trucks so beautiful here wtf pic.twitter.com/wmvvQxgLsF
— Elsa (@elsathora) June 11, 2026
Why did no one tell me ranch sauce is like crack? EUROPE WE NEED RANCH ASAP https://t.co/YNtnPJopVZ pic.twitter.com/gN0iSjiKSe
— Elsa (@elsathora) June 9, 2026
Indiana is exactly how I dreamed America would be
— Elsa (@elsathora) June 10, 2026
Small towns, wide open spaces, cornfields, barns, cute houses, diners, water towers, friendly people, great food, American flags everywhere, and so much more!
Time for the next part of this adventure
Thank you Indiana! pic.twitter.com/Ru5sQYzrgn
Another unexpected side effect of coming to the States for the World Cup while the NBA finals are also in progress? Tourists in the Big Apple are finding themselves surrounded by New York sports fans who are so ready for their team to (possibly) win the championship this year, and the enthusiasm is rubbing off. Go, Knicks!
@rukiah.ally2 I’m now a true New Yorker🤣🏀 #knicks #arsenal #newyorkcity #basketballtiktok #nbafinals ♬ Cooking, bossa nova, adults, light(950693) - Kids Sound
It's also not just the fans who are getting into the Americana. Spanish superstar Lamine Yamal was spotted shopping in Walmart this week. Men in Blazers shared the video on their TikTok page:
Other fans are bringing their culture to the US, like the Scottish tourists who woke up their neighbors with the dulcet tones of their bagpipes. (In fact, the Scottish fans, known as the Tartan Army, have been making their presence known all over Massachusetts, where the team's first two matches are being held.)
There are literally thousands of fans chronicling their journeys around the US during the World Cup, but these are just some of the wholesome and hilarious ones we've found. Is it possible this tournament really might be the global unifier we need?
Keep up with all of CNET's World Cup coverage, including our watch guides and tips on finding local watch parties to hang out with fellow fans -- and tourists.