Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Large Language Model-Assisted Cleaning of Report-Derived Labels in a Large-Scale Chest CT Dataset
View PDFAbstract:Purpose: To evaluate whether large language model (LLM)-assisted label cleaning can identify label-report discordance in CT-RATE, a large-scale public chest CT dataset.
Materials and Methods: After report-level deduplication, 24,446 unique radiology reports were identified. Twelve reports were excluded from the primary GPT-5.4 analysis because of Microsoft Azure AI Foundry content-safety filtering, leaving 24,434 reports and 439,812 label instances across 18 abnormality categories. GPT-5.4-derived binary labels were generated from report text using structured JSON output and compared with existing CT-RATE labels. Discordant instances were adjudicated by radiologists. In addition, 100 randomly sampled reports were manually annotated to compare CT-RATE labels, individual LLM-derived labels, and multi-LLM majority-vote labels against radiologist-annotated reference labels.
Results: Overall agreement between GPT-5.4-derived and CT-RATE labels was 96.4%, with Cohen's kappa of 0.884. Lymphadenopathy showed the lowest agreement and kappa. In discordance review, radiologist adjudication supported GPT-5.4-derived labels in 72 of 97 (74.2%) general discordant instances and 91 of 99 (91.9%) targeted lymphadenopathy discordant instances. Against radiologist-annotated reference labels, multi-LLM majority-vote labels achieved the highest label-macro-averaged F1 score and Cohen's kappa.
Conclusion: LLM-assisted label cleaning identified clinically meaningful label-report discordance in CT-RATE and may support scalable quality improvement of public imaging datasets. The cleaned dataset will be made publicly available to support future research.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.