Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Intelligibility of Speech in Noise: Investigating Contribution of Magnitude and Phase Spectra
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:It is well known that intelligibility of speech reduces in the presence of ambient noise. However, studies show that all sounds are not affected uniformly (or equally) and that vowels are more robust to noise than consonants. In this study, intelligibility of various consonants is assessed and analyzed in stationary white noise and non-stationary babble noise conditions. Specifically, this study investigates the individual contribution of magnitude and phase spectra of a given speech signal on human speech recognition of consonants in noisy conditions. In this regard, three experiments are carried out. In experiment 1, clean signal, signal reconstructed with only magnitude spectrum information (magnitude only signal) and signal reconstructed with only phase spectrum information (phase only signal) are assessed for intelligibility. In experiment 2, noise is added to clean speech. From noisy speech, phase only signal and magnitude only signal are reconstructed and intelligibility tests are performed for all these three signals. In experiment 3, noise is added directly to the magnitude only and phase only signals reconstructed from clean speech and their intelligibility is assessed. Results of these experiments show that magnitude spectrum contributes more to intelligibility in clean condition than phase spectrum, while information from phase spectrum is more robust in noisy conditions. It is also observed that, among consonants, nasals are more susceptible to noise whereas fricatives and approximants were observed to be comparatively more robust.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.