Whether you want to back up all your precious files, make it easier to share and collaborate, or create your own entertainment cloud, network-attached storage (NAS) devices are the way. These versatile servers can boost your home network and help you offload tasks from your computer and other devices.
I’ve spent the last few months testing NAS devices from some of the top brands with a focus on families looking to create backups and maybe spin up an entertainment server to cut back on streaming subscriptions. These are the NAS devices I recommend.
You might want to check out our related guides too, like How to Set Up an NAS Server, How to Back Up Your Digital Life, and The Best External Hard Drives.
The NAS Servers I Recommend Most
While no longer undisputed, Synology is still the heavyweight champion of the NAS market, and this two-bay NAS is ideal for the average home. It is extremely fast, either topping the charts or coming close in my tests, and consistently hitting around 300 MB/s read and 250 MB/s write, though that drops to a little over 100 MB/s if your network is limited to 1 Gbps anywhere (router, port, cable, or switch). It has a generous array of ports (2.5-Gbps and 1-Gbps Ethernet ports and USB ports front and back). The excellent hardware includes a speedy Intel Celeron J4125 quad-core processor, 2 GB of RAM that can be upgraded to 6 GB, and space for two drives (up to 40 TB). It is compact and relatively quiet, with some minor fan noise when it’s busy. The screwless clip-on tray design makes it quick to insert drives.
Setup and configuration are simple and accessible. Synology’s software, through its web interface and mobile apps, is the most polished and user-friendly I’ve tested, and Synology offers the largest selection of apps (both its own polished offerings and third-party apps like Plex and Jellyfin). This NAS offers tons of flexibility for backups, works great as a media server, and offers a lot of extras, including VPN server and security camera support.
On the downside, Synology’s devices are relatively expensive. Remember that, as on most NAS devices, you must provide your own drives. Synology also briefly locked down its NAS lineup to Synology drives, deeming third-party drives incompatible. While it has rolled this back after some protest, so you can use third-party drives now, it’s a bit of a red flag. There’s also no HDMI port here, which you might want for connecting a TV. If you think you need more space, the Synology DiskStation DS425+ ($520) adds an extra two bays.
For folks seeking a simple network backup that doesn’t require much thought or configuration, I also tested the all-in-one Synology BeeStation Plus, which comes with storage included (prices are currently inflated due to the AI-driven shortage), but no apps or additional features. It’s quick and easy to set up, works fine for automatic backups, and has a decent photo app that can recognize faces, but the performance is middling.
The regular Synology BeeStation ($365) is a bit more affordable, but only has half the space at 4 TB. For a straightforward backup solution, the BeeStation is as easy as it gets, but you can get more for your money.
Synology offers a very wide range of NAS devices, including powerful systems for big businesses. It also makes good routers that can be paired to form a mesh and security cameras that I have not yet tested.
A relative newcomer to the NAS market, Ugreen is better known for its charging gear and mobile storage, but this four-bay NAS is an impressive debut. For most people, the Ugreen NASync DH4300 Plus is a very affordable way to jump to four bays, potentially giving you up to 128 TB, though you must provide your own drives. It wasn’t especially fast in my tests, but after your initial setup, this is unlikely to be a big issue for most people, and it wasn’t too slow either. You can expect around 100 MB/s read/write speeds for a 1-Gbps network, but can push up to between 200 and 300 MB/s if your network gear supports it. It has a single 2.5-Gbps Ethernet port, but also two USB-A ports, one USB-C port, and an HDMI port. It runs on a Rockchip processor with 8 GB of DDR4 RAM (not upgradeable). I like the relatively compact design, with top-loading bays, and it’s quiet.
I found this NAS setup a breeze, just as easy as my top pick. It’s a good starter NAS, with minimal configuration to worry about. There aren’t as many apps to choose from, and they aren't as polished as Synology’s apps, but I had no issues organizing and sharing my photo library and getting Jellyfin up and running for movie streaming. Most folks don’t need to spend any more than this. If you’re OK with two bays, the DH2300 ($200) is even more affordable.
Downsides here include the average performance for file transfers, the tiny screws you must wrestle with to install drives, the lack of upgradability, and the relatively limited selection of apps (though I expect this to grow).
Ugreen has a relatively modest range of NAS devices, but it just released a more powerful Pro model and a Battery Backup and Surge Protector ($118).
Asustor is a spin-off from Asus (short for Asus-storage), which also makes some of the best routers and mesh systems you can buy. This NAS could be an ideal choice for anyone seeking something for the TV. Resembling a set-top box, this svelte, six-bay NAS takes M.2 NVMe solid-state drives (SSDs) up to 48 TB. It is very fast, hitting around 300 MB/s read/write if you have the network and gear to handle it, and is very quiet compared to a traditional NAS equipped with HDDs. You might even use it to run PC games, and it has no issue playing 4K movies or streaming music. It’s also effective as a surveillance station for security cameras.
Sadly, SSDs are far more expensive than usual right now because of soaring demand from AI data centers, so if you don’t already have some, you could end up spending hundreds, or even thousands, to kit this out. For most folks, this is overkill, and you can get similar results with something far more affordable. But if you need speed and silence, it could be worth considering. There is also a 12-bay model ($880).
I also tried the Asustor AS5404T, a good-looking 4-bay NAS with red highlights and a glossy black cover that sticks over the bays magnetically. It’s quick and easy to get up and running via your web browser (a better option than the mobile app). It’s also a fast performer, but it is relatively noisy, so stick it somewhere out of the way if that’s going to annoy you. Software is a little rough around the edges, with some slight translation errors, but there are tons of configuration options and a decent selection of apps. It also comes in a 2-bay model ($407).
Asustor also offers a wide range of NAS devices, including many more powerful options if you are prepared to spend big.
Other NAS Servers I Tested
There were far more similarities between the NAS devices I tested than differences. All of them were very capable for my intended purposes of file backup and sharing, and as media servers. I plan to dig deeper into Home Assistant and security camera features in the coming months, but I’ve focused on casual home users with my picks above.
QNAP TS-464-8G for $639: This was easy to configure through my browser after I installed a PC app to find it on my network. The interface is a bit basic, and the software is a little rough around the edges, with some slight translation errors. But the performance is excellent, with top-notch hardware inside, generous ports (two 2.5 Gbps, four USB, HDMI, and a PCIe slot), and full upgradability. There’s nothing much preinstalled, so you can choose what you want to use it for and only install the necessary apps, though it does take time. I found the third-party apps limited, with no Jellyfin or Plex in the app store. You can install them, but it’s a little more work than some of the other NAS systems I tested. It’s not the most user-friendly option, it’s expensive, and it’s quite big, with some fan noise under heavy load. It also takes a long time to shut down. There is also a two-bay option ($489).
TerraMaster F4-4245 Plus for $425: This stylish, compact two-bay NAS boasts solid hardware and speedy performance, though you need your own drives for the tool-free bays. It was easy to set up, but some ropey translations and poor grammar in the interface let it down. Ports are very generous, with three M.2 SSD slots, four USBs, HDMI, and two 5-Gbps Ethernet ports, and it stays mostly quiet. Unfortunately, the interface was a little glitchy at times. There’s a decent selection of apps, including Plex and Jellyfin, Docker, and VPN Server support, but fewer than Asustor or Synology offers. There is also a four-bay model ($650).
Zettlab D4 for $430: Local AI is the main selling point for this NAS device, and it analyses every file you upload to make it easy to find with natural language searches later (it’s not for generative AI). The onboard AI search works well for finding photos and videos, and I was able to quickly find the files I wanted during testing. But this NAS server is very large and heavy, with a superfluous display and lighting on the front. It looks good, so it might appeal if you plan to have it out in the open, but I’m not sold on the utility. It also produces a lot of fan noise, even when it’s not doing anything much. The app store is a little thin, but you can find Docker, Jellyfin, Plex, Home Assistant, and a bunch of other useful programs. This is still a relatively new brand with a first release that came out of crowdfunding, and it’s all a bit buggy (my software update stalled), with some rough translations. It is competitively priced, and the AI could be useful for folks with a lot of photos or videos, but it’s a gamble how much this will improve and how long it will be supported compared to established manufacturers.
Why Would I Want an NAS Server?
There are various reasons you might want an NAS server, but most likely, you want to back up and share files or run a media server for movies and music. You might also use an NAS for security camera footage, local smart home controls with Home Assistant, or just to expand the available storage for your PC. Some folks will prefer an NAS server to the cloud because they want to preserve privacy and control over their own files.
While there is an upfront cost for the NAS, any drives you add, and running costs in electricity, an NAS server may enable you to cancel or reduce cloud storage subscriptions and maybe even streaming services.
What to Consider When Buying an NAS Device
Think of an NAS as a low-power computer with minimal extras and scalable storage. The features to look for depend heavily on your intended use. Here’s a list of things to consider:
- Bays and slots: Most NAS devices are diskless, so you must buy and install your own hard disk drives (HDDs) or solid-state drives (SSDs). Always check compatibility and consider the extra expense, especially right now when AI is driving up the cost of storage.
- Software and app support: Consider the apps that the manufacturer provides and third-party apps available in the app store.
- Speed and performance: The processor and RAM give you some idea, but read reviews to find out what the real-world performance is like.
- Ports: Think about the speed of the Ethernet port that connects to your router, but you may also want USB ports or an HDMI port to hook it up to a TV.
- Noise: Most NAS devices have fans inside, so you can expect some fan noise, especially when they are busy, but some are definitely louder than others, which could be important if you plan to use it under the TV or keep it somewhere the noise might bother you.
How I Test NAS Devices
I tested each NAS for at least two weeks, usually longer, setting up and configuring through the web interface. I installed a pair of new Seagate Ironwolf 4-TB drives to test each NAS. Where applicable, I tested a couple of older drives and a Samsung 990 Pro 1 TB SSD I already had. I assessed the ease of installation, app library, overall design, and fan noise in operation. I also installed mobile apps where available and tested remote access features.
To test performance, I copied and moved the same batch of files around on my network to and from each NAS. I also uploaded personal photos and videos, created a movie and TV show library using Jellyfin, and used each NAS to share files and stream content for my family on multiple computers, laptops, TVs, and smartphones in my home.
Where the NAS touted special features, such as onboard AI, I tested them out. I also tested USB ports, shutdown procedures, and recovery from internet outages.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.