Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Steering Multirobot Behavior via Closed-Loop Affine Activation Editing
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Real-world robots need to adapt their behavior beyond the envelope of their pre-trained policy. Policy finetuning or retraining are options, but they risk catastrophic forgetting, degrading the pretrained policy's base performance. To combat this, we introduce CLAE: Closed-Loop Affine Activation Editing, an inference-time framework for steering the behavior of a frozen policy by editing intermediate activations while keeping the base policy weights and downstream action head untouched. CLAE approaches behavior steering as a closed-loop problem whose outputs edit policy activations that adapt online to the robot state, environment, target behavior, and multi-robot context. It trains a sparse autoencoder over frozen-policy activations, selects behavior-relevant latent features via post-hoc probing, and learns a lightweight RL-based steering policy that applies state-dependent affine edits to selected latents during inference. We validate CLAE on a frozen multi-quadrotor navigation policy trained to perform a single task: navigating robots to a set of goal locations while avoiding obstacles. Through extensive simulations and physical tests, we show that while navigating to their goal positions, CLAE can 1. steer individual robot behavior by controlling each robot's velocity profile; 2. coordinate multirobot behavior by preserving a desired formation; and 3. produce entirely new behavior wherein robots are required to reduce their exposure to surveillance cameras in the environment.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.