Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Benchmarking Neural Speech Compression from a Rate-Distortion Perspective
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Learning-based speech compression has achieved promising low-bitrate performance, but many neural speech codecs still describe quantized latents with preset-rate discrete symbols or apply entropy coding only after symbol generation. Such designs decouple representation learning from probability modeling, limiting their ability to exploit the non-uniform usage and temporal dependencies of learned speech latents. In this paper, we benchmark neural speech compression from a rate--distortion perspective and further investigate entropy-constrained coding for low-bitrate speech compression. We first formulate a unified learning-based speech coding pipeline and provide a benchmark-style analysis of recent neural speech codecs, showing that explicit probability modeling remains underexplored in learned speech compression. We then propose ECC, an Entropy-Constrained Codec that combines scalar quantization with a learned entropy model. ECC integrates hyperprior-based side information, channel-wise context modeling, latent residual prediction, and lightweight temporal modeling to estimate latent likelihoods for rate estimation during training and arithmetic coding during inference. To further improve low-bitrate efficiency, ECC introduces entropy skip, which omits highly predictable residual symbols using decoder-available scale estimates without transmitting additional skip masks. Extensive experiments show that ECC achieves a favorable low-bitrate rate--distortion trade-off over conventional and neural codec baselines, reducing BD-rate by 39.9% on ViSQOL and 76.3% on PESQ on average over two widely-used test sets. Ablation and diagnostic studies further validate the effectiveness of entropy modeling. Project Page: this https URL
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.