Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:SMC-ITA: Sequential Monte Carlo Inference-Time Alignment for Video-to-Audio Generation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Video-to-audio (V2A) generation must jointly satisfy audiovisual alignment, semantic consistency, temporal synchronization, and perceptual quality. While prior work has mainly focused on model architecture, multimodal conditioning, and training objectives, inference-time alignment for V2A remains underexplored. In this paper, we study inference-time alignment for flow-matching-based V2A generation and formulate it as a search problem. We propose Sequential Monte Carlo Inference-Time Alignment (SMC-ITA), which combines lookahead-based reward estimation and sequential Monte Carlo resampling to reallocate computation adaptively using multi-dimensional cross-modal rewards. SMC-ITA improves over naive single-trajectory sampling, achieving a 55.67% relative reduction in DeSync, a 20.23% improvement in IB-score, and a 15.44% improvement in Audio Quality. Under matched NFE budgets, it also achieves the best overall trade-off among the compared search baselines, outperforming Best-of-N and Beam Search. Ablation studies further show that lookahead improves the reliability of intermediate reward estimates and that systematic resampling is a strong practical default for V2A inference-time alignment.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.