Lenovo is currently the biggest PC and laptop company in the world, and they just so happen to make some of our favorite laptops and PC peripherals. In fact, our list of the Best Laptops you can buy include a number of Lenovo devices that we’ve tested and fully recommend, ranging from high-end premium laptops to options for budget-minded shoppers. If you are looking to save a few bucks while shopping for a new Lenovo product, here are the Lenovo coupon codes and special offers you need to know about.
Score Weekly Tech Deals, Price Match Guarantee, and Free Shipping
In addition to the deals listed above, Lenovo has a number of other current offers available when shopping through Lenovo.com. There are weekly deals on PCs and tech that include free shipping with no minimums. For certain products, you can even choose to buy online and pick up in-store at Best Buy. If you’re looking for more Lenovo recommendations, we’re big fans of the Lenovo Idea Tab Pro, an Android tablet that’s currently on our Best Tablets list. It’s currently discounted by 26%, bringing the price down to $280.
Lenovo is also offering price-matching on any comparable PC, including from many online retailers. That’s really helpful, as it’s not uncommon to see price discrepancies between different retailers.
Get Exclusive Savings With Lenovo Discount Programs
Lenovo does offer a fairly generous discount program for certain demographics as well. These include a 5% off Education, Healthcare, First Responder, and Senior (over 55) discount.
You can use this discount on anything you find at Lenovo.com, which includes a lot more than just Lenovo-branded laptops. For example, Lenovo sells one of our favorite laptop docking stations, the Kensington Triple Video Mobile Dock. Despite its tiny size, this tiny device can power up to three 1080p (or two 4K) displays simultaneously. It’s a great example of the wide diversity of products you can use these discounts and coupon codes on.
Buy More Save More With Lenovo
If you’re looking to buy multiple devices, or are planning to make a big tech purchase soon, I’d recommend buying now to get more savings. Use Lenovo promo code BUYMORELENOVO at checkout to save $15 on purchases of $500-$750, $25 off purchases of $750-$1,000, save $40 on purchases of $1,000-$2,000, and get $100 off when you purchase something $2,000 or more. (Excludes clearance and workstation items.)
Get 35% Off the Lenovo Tab Pro
The Lenovo Idea Tab Pro is a perfect tablet for students, with a vibrant nearly-13 inch 3K touchscreen display which is perfect for every day tasks, like reading, studying, and streaming. It also has a MediaTek processor, 8GB memory, and 128GB storage for seamless multitasking with ample storage for apps and files. Plus, it has dual cameras for Zoom calls. Although the Lenovo Idea Tab Pro is specifically designed with students in mind, it’s versatile enough to be a great fit for a multitude of people wanting a reliable tablet with tons of extra features. Plus, it’s 35% off right now. There’s no better time to buy.
Enjoy Perks When You Join My Lenovo Rewards
Lenovo has a My Lenovo Rewards system that can earn you points that can be spent on future purchases from Lenovo.com. Almost everything you buy gets you between 3% and 9% back in the form of reward points, and you can start redeeming points right after signing up for an account. 1,000 points is equal to $1 that you can spend on future purchases. On top of this, you’ll benefit from frequent sweepstakes, exclusive member-only savings, birthday rewards, free expedited delivery, and more. Sign up today—it’s free.
Lenovo Financing and Lease-to-Own Options
Lenovo uses Katapult to offer financing and lease-to-own options on its laptops. That might be useful if you’ve been eyeing one of Lenovo’s higher-end laptops. One of our favorite of these is the Lenovo Yoga 9i, a gorgeous 2-in-1 with a bright OLED screen and a luxurious design. This laptop is currently listed as one of our top recommendations for the Best Laptops and Best 2-in-1 Laptop.
Katapult allows you to buy now and pay over time, without charging late fees. If you put down a $45 initial payment, you can check out the laptop today. Katapult offers up to $3,500 in pre-approved leases and allows you to make minimum payments over time or buyout early.
Join Lenovo Business and Save $100
If you’re a small business owner, Lenovo Pro can help you grow your business quickly and effectively. When you join, you’ll unlock a bevy of helpful support, including receiving expert advice, community insights, and you’ll get free Premier Support on Think PCs. And right now, when you join Lenovo Pro for business, new members can save $100 of their first purchase of $1,000 or more.