June is here, and we’ve got so much to celebrate. It’s the beginning of summer, it’s Black Music Month and today is Juneteenth. While there’s never a bad time to support Black-owned businesses, June presents an excellent opportunity to show some love while stocking up on your favorite beauty items. Plus, with Amazon’s Prime Day sale quickly approaching, you can even score some steep discounts while you’re at it.
Many of the biggest beauty industry trends (nail art, acrylic nails, hair color and extensions, to name a few) have been a staple of Black beauty for years. There are many amazing Black-owned beauty brands to support and celebrate. If you're on the lookout for the best Black-owned beauty brands to buy from, whether you're looking for skincare or an update to your makeup stash, you've come to the right place.
Black-owned beauty brands tend to be overlooked in the beauty industry, which is why I've compiled a list highlighting notable Black-owned hair care, skin care and cosmetic brands. Don't think of this list as a comprehensive history, but a starting point.
Read more: 8 Ways to Get Involved During Black History Month and Beyond
Black-owned skin care
The mission of Topicals is to transform how people feel about their skin through effective, science-backed products and mental health advocacy. The brand was founded by entrepreneur Olamide Olowe, who grew up with chronic skin conditions. Her lived experience inspired her decision to start the company in hopes of shifting the focus away from the need for “perfect” skin to be beautiful. If you're looking for something to brighten and hydrate your face and under-eyes, the Faded cream and eye mask bundle is the place to start.
Lisa Hanna Beauty was created by Lisa Hanna, a former Jamaican politician and winner of the 1993 Miss World title. The skincare line was designed to “renew, protect and reveal visibly radiant skin at every stage.” There’s a fade balm and moisture creme, but I am currently obsessed with the Luminous Face and Body Glow serum. You just can’t go wrong here.
Sun care is serious business, especially for Shontay Lundy, the founder of Black Girl Sunscreen. Good sunscreen can help reduce scarring and protect skin from the sun. (Yes, Black people need that protection, too.) The problem is that most mineral sunscreens will give anyone with darker skin a visible white cast. Enter Black Girl Sunscreen, which not only moisturizes and protects dark skin but also does so without discoloration.
Ixora Botanical Beauty is another popular brand and one I adore. It was founded by Mercedes Edney in St. Croix, US Virgin Islands and later relocated to Charlotte, North Carolina. The founder’s struggles inspired the brand with dry skin and eczema. Ixora Botanical Beauty has a host of incredible products, but one of its bestsellers is its donkey milk and chamomile hydrating facial cleanser. This one is a staple in my own routine.
Épanouie Skincare is TLC for your skin, according to the company’s website. The brand offers personal consultations to help you find exactly what you need for your skin concerns. These products are good for sensitive skin because they’re gentle yet effective.
Dorion Renaud created this brand to target dryness, discoloration and more for melanin-rich skin. With products formulated with shea butter, rosewater, CocoShea, and other protective ingredients, all skin types can achieve healthy, glowing skin.
Most people already know about Fenty Beauty thanks to its creator, Rihanna. In addition to the typical facial skin care products to cleanse, hydrate and lock in moisture, Fenty Skin offers body care options, too.
Jane Ormon, the founder of Nola Skinsentials, wanted to deliver plant-based ingredients to improve everyone's skin care routine. The company's products can reduce acne and help hydrate the skin, too.
Oui the People was founded by Karen Young and launched with a single product in 2014. The brand has grown significantly over the years and now offers several amazing products, including its featherweight hydrating body gloss.
Black-owned hair care
Camille Rose founder Janell Stephens is all about using gourmet food-grade ingredients like honey, aloe and ginger to enrich hair. Founded in 2011, this hair care company is one of the few that's still going strong from the early days of the natural hair movement.
This celebrity-owned hair care line from Tracee Ellis Ross is designed with curly and coily hair in mind. Using oil blends such as Jojoba and argan oils, along with leave-in conditioners and other products, this brand defines hair.
This hair care brand has always been ahead of the curve. Alikay Naturals is dedicated to creating products that nourish your hair over time. And if you're familiar with and love the LOC (liquid, oil, cream) method, you have founder Rochelle Graham-Campbell to thank. You can’t go wrong with the Honey and Sage Deep Conditioner.
Cecred is Beyoncé’s hair care line, and the products are worth the hype. “It’s been my lifelong dream to create these hair products and bring some of my mother’s teachings to life,“ Beyoncé writes on the website. The products were created specifically for Black women and our uniquely beautiful hair. The clarifying shampoo scalp scrub is one of my favorites.
Another foundational brand, TGIN (Thank God It's Natural) is the brainchild of Chris-Tia Donaldson, a Harvard Law grad who was trying to figure out how she'd wear her hair to work. You'll find many products with ingredients like shea butter and vitamin E that soften and moisturize hair. The Butter Cream Daily Moisturizer is one of the brand’s bestsellers, and it helps keep your hair soft, shiny and manageable without weighing it down.
Like many entrepreneurs, Taliah Waajid started early -- at age 14, in fact. Since then, she and her family have been making products that strengthen and soften curly hair using bamboo, apple, and shea butter, along with other ingredients.
Black-owned makeup
You absolutely can’t talk about Black-owned makeup brands without mentioning the legendary Pat McGrath. Pat McGrath Labs was founded in 2006 and has produced high-quality products ever since. There’s also so much to choose from here. You can start prepping your skin, and then create a full makeup routine with foundation, concealer and mascara before topping it all off with one of the brand's signature lip colors.
Pear Nova launched as a nail polish brand but has since branched off into makeup with the most gorgeous eyeshadow palette. Rachel James founded the brand to fill a “void in the representation of medium to dark skin tones in the nail world.” If you’re wondering why the name Pear Nova, the brand was named after James’ “sister-in-love,” Nova Henry, who was a victim of domestic violence. The brand is vegan-friendly, cruelty-free and devoted to supporting domestic violence victims and raising awareness on the issue.
Beauty Bakerie was a viral brand that took the market by storm with its creative food names and designs. It was founded by Cashmere Nicole in 2011 and offers makeup in several shades, packaged in cute designs to match a playful makeup wearer's aesthetic.
The Lip Bar started long before it was featured on Shark Tank. In 2012, Melissa Butler decided to define what beauty was right from her own kitchen. Now, the brand is delivering makeup for diverse shades through products like concealer, tinted skin conditioner and, as the company name suggests, lipstick.
Black Opal is one of the pioneers of makeup for women of color. The company started in 1994 and is owned by Desirée Rogers, who served as the Social Secretary during the Obama presidency, and Cheryl Mayberry McKissack. Black Opal offers affordability and a range of shades for diverse skin tones.
This brand is known for both skin care and makeup. It was created by Another World star Vera Moore, who decided to jump into the beauty world when she saw a need for a natural-looking foundation that didn't come off so easily.
Gina Delisme founded Nagi Cosmetics in 2012 after deciding to pursue a new career path. Specially formulated for women of color, the products also offer a nice range for medium to dark skin tones.