Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Optimizing 2D Input Representations and Sub-phase Fusion Strategies for Differential Diagnosis of Asthma and COPD Using CNN- and GRU-Based Networks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:This study aims to explore the performance of the VAR model in comparison with mel-frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC) matrices and log-mel spectrograms using deep learning. In pulmonary sound classification, spectrogram-based representations suffer from inconsistent temporal dimensions due to varying respiratory cycle durations. Along with traditional trimming/zero-padding, adaptive-length windowing was presented to fix their temporal dimensions. Their spectral and temporal dimensions were optimized by testing a range of parameters. Different convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures were employed to extract features from the two-dimensional representations obtained over the sub-phases. The extracted sub-phase features were then fused using various strategies including direct concatenation, gated recurrent unit (GRU) network and GRU with attention mechanism. Model performances were assessed through respiratory cycle-based evaluation and subject-based evaluation comprising multiple respiratory cycles. Several data augmentation techniques were also studied to cope with limitations in data size. The best cycle-based F1-score (0.877) was obtained using the MFCC matrices with thirteen coefficients and 64-point time resolution per sub-phase representation followed by direct feature concatenation, and the best subject-based F1-score (0.855) was obtained using the MFCC matrices with thirteen coefficients and 256-point time resolution per full-cycle representation, both obtained by adaptive-length windowing. Augmentation degraded the performance of models overall, yet mixup augmentation was the best among the methods tested. MFCC outperformed log-mel spectrogram and VAR model in differentiation of asthma and COPD. Sophisticated fusion strategies did not improve the diagnosis. Augmentation did not contribute, demonstrating the significance of authentic data in pulmonary sound studies.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.