Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Offline Reinforcement Learning for Plasma Control in Nuclear Fusion: Codebase and Benchmark
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Offline reinforcement learning (RL) offers a promising route for developing plasma controllers from historical tokamak data, since online trial-and-error on real devices is costly and risky. However, progress in this direction remains difficult to measure due to the lack of a standardized offline RL benchmark for realistic multi-actuator, long-horizon plasma control problems in nuclear fusion. We introduce RL4F, an Offline Reinforcement Learning Benchmark for Plasma Control in Nuclear Fusion, providing closed-loop evaluation environments and baseline comparisons across four full-profile tracking tasks: rotation, density, temperature, and pressure. The dynamics function underlying the evaluation environment is built from historical discharge data from DIII-D, a real-world Tokamak. We evaluate a broad set of imitation learning and offline RL baselines under a unified protocol. We find that offline model-based RL methods obtain the best average performance on most objectives, although no single method dominates all tasks, highlighting the importance of dynamics modeling in complex, long-horizon plasma control tasks. To foster further research, we open-source the codebase, datasets, and evaluation framework, providing a benchmark not only for the fusion community but also for algorithm development in offline RL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.