For Amazon's summer sale event, I've compiled a list of the best Prime Day fitness tech deals on our favorite gadgets. From smartwatches and fitness trackers to walking pads and recovery gear, we've tested and vetted it all.
I will be updating this list daily with the freshest Prime Day fitness tech deals, so be sure to check back often. For more information on sales, browse our roundup of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
- The best Apple Watch: Apple Watch Series 11 (42 mm) for $279 ($120 off)
- A more affordable smartwatch: Apple Watch SE 3 (44 mm) for $229 ($50 off)
- Walk from home: Urevo CyberPad for $340 ($140 off)
- The best value massage gun: Hyperice Hypervolt 2 for $183 ($46 off)
- LED compression boots for recovery: Therabody JetBoots Pro Plus for $900 ($250 off)
The Best Smartwatch for iPhone Owners
The Series 11 is the ultimate smartwatch for iPhone users. With an improved 24-hour battery life, it’s now suitable for tracking your sleep. This model also boasts clinically-validated watchOS health updates, including FDA-cleared hypertension notifications and Apple’s proprietary Sleep Score. Plus, after a lengthy patent dispute was settled in 2024, blood oxygen sensing is back. Right now, the Series 11 is priced the same as the better value SE 3 (44 mm)—which is also on sale. Don’t miss out on this steal.
The Affordable Apple Watch Just Got Cheaper
If you're looking for the best value in Apple Watches, look no further than the Watch SE (3rd Gen). It’s packed with health features that its predecessor didn't offer, such as sleep apnea notifications and skin temperature sensing. Plus, it supports fast charging and 5G connectivity. While it includes fall detection, it doesn’t measure blood oxygen levels or perform electrocardiograms, nor does it offer the latest hypertension notifications. It boasts an always-on OLED display, but its brightness reaches 1,000 nits, whereas the Series 11 features a more vibrant 2,000-nit wide-angle display. It also lacks the ultra-wideband (UWB) locator chip for precision finding, which might matter to some users.
That said, if these limitations don’t matter to you, the SE 3 is an excellent choice, especially with current promotions making it $50 less than the Series 11’s discounted price.
The Best Smartwatch for Android Owners
The Google Pixel Watch 4 is the best smartwatch for Android users. As the first repairable smartwatch from Google, you can swap out the battery and the gorgeous, domed display if necessary, using parts from iFixit. The wellness features—including heart-rate tracking, blood oxygen sensing, and the revamped sleep tracking—are accurate and highly reliable. With the cellular version, there’s even support for satellite messaging during emergencies. According to editor Julian Chokkattu, the best new feature is the Raise to Talk with Gemini. There are also a few features exclusive to Pixel phones, like AI-powered smart replies and call screening. The battery performance is great, lasting around a day and a half, and with quick charging, you can easily gain over 50 percent power in just 15 minutes.
The Best Smartwatch for Samsung Loyalists
The Galaxy Watch 8 stands out as the best choice for Samsung owners. Its distinctive “squircle” design makes for a big, bright display that strikes an aesthetic balance between Apple’s square and Google’s round designs. It shines in health and fitness tracking, including dependable heart rate monitoring, solid sleep tracking with sleep apnea notifications, and accurate automatic workout detection. New features, like the Antioxidant Index and Vascular Load, are intriguing but somewhat dubious. Plus, there’s dual-frequency GPS for accurate mapping and access to the Gemini assistant.
The Best Walking Pad Is $140 Off
The Urevo CyberPad is our top choice for a walking pad, primarily because of its 14-percent incline—the highest we’ve seen in our testing. According to WIRED tester Kristin Canning, setup is a breeze, and you can easily control it via its remote or app. She appreciates the sturdy build and comfortable belt, which together ensure a solid workout experience. With a maximum speed of 4 mph and an adjustable incline that reaches either 9 or 14 percent, depending on how you position it, it offers enough versatility for walking. While it may not be the quietest option, it’s not disruptive if you're working or reading. Weighing in at 71 pounds, it provides stability, but it might not be the easiest to move around; the included wheels help with portability, though.
You Need a Percussive Massage Gun
The Hyperice Hypervolt 2 is the best value massage gun on the market. It’s under $200 and lighter than most Theraguns, weighing just 1.8 pounds. Thanks to its 60-watt brushless motor, it still delivers robust power with three speeds of percussion and a three-hour battery life. The pressure sensor guides your intensity, and the patented QuietGlide technology keeps noise to a minimum. Its Bluetooth connectivity syncs with the Hyperice app, enabling you to follow guided routines and adjust settings right from your phone. Plus, it comes equipped with five head attachments: fork, ball, cushion, flat, and bullet.
The Most Affordable Theragun Is $60 Off
The Theragun Relief is the most affordable Theragun and is cheaper than the Hyperice Hypervolt 2. Despite its budget-friendly price, it matches the power of many of its pricier competitors. There are three adjustable speed settings. It lacks an LCD screen and Therbody app connectivity for device control, but it’s a one-button operation that’s refreshing to use. It doesn’t come with a travel lock or storage case, but you do get three attachments: standard ball, dampener, and thumb. At $100, it’s practically a steal.
The Best Compression Boots Are $250 Off
Therabody’s JetBoots Pro Plus is our favorite pair of compression boots. In addition to pneumatic compression therapy, they also implement vibration and infrared LED therapies for a more effective recovery process. The JetBoots Pro Plus are designed to increase blood circulation, flush out lactic acid, and reduce inflammation. They’re fully wireless and available in three sizes. They’re also easy to control via the LCD screen and feature preset routines tailored to warm-ups and recoveries.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.