Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Dexterous Point Policy: Learning Point-based Dexterous Hand Policies from Human Demonstrations
View PDFAbstract:Robotic foundation models pre-trained on human demonstration videos have shown promise, but a significant embodiment gap remains when the resulting policies are deployed on real robots. A common remedy is to fine-tune these models on robot-specific demonstrations. However, robot data collection can be prohibitively expensive and time-consuming, which is particularly acute in dexterous manipulation, e.g., teleoperating a multi-fingered hand for even a single atomic task can take days. To address this, we introduce Dexterous Point Policy, a framework that learns dexterous manipulation policies directly from human videos and requires no robot demonstrations. Our core insight is that a unified 3D keypoint representation can bridge human and robot embodiments when used for both observations and actions. Specifically, we extract 3D keypoints of task-relevant objects and human hands from raw videos, and train an autoregressive transformer over these keypoints. We observe that at the keypoint level, specifically the wrist and fingertips, human and robot behaviors closely align, enabling direct policy transfer. On a suite of real-robot tasks spanning pick-and-place and tool use, Dexterous Point Policy attains 75.0% success, whereas a state-of-the-art VLA baseline reaches only 1.0%. Furthermore, our method generalizes strongly to unseen scenarios, including multi-object environments and novel object categories.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.