I continue to work on my city builder game Microlandia, launched here in HN ~6 months ago. I originally predicted a few dozen urbanism nerds would play it, but now almost 10,000 copies sold. I'm still a solo developer but now I collaborate with 2D, 3D and music artists. Which is good because the original art that I drew myself for the launch was horrible.
I'm currently working on modeling energy, climate and new policies like universal basic income
Based on the general reception you get almost every time you mention this on HN, you really should make your own text-based forum available as there is a ton of us interested in diving into the game mechanics, your plans and general ideas a lot more than probably HN could support.
Let me know if you're looking for an experienced web dev who can help you with all of it ;)
This reminds me of what "Hell Mod" did to Diablo I: Basically reinvented the game as it would have been if Blizzard hadn't been constrained by money or time, and knew what worked from their sequels.
I'm really interested in how the landlord/land price logic works, as it would be key to building a realistic city where higher income earners live closer to CBD, etc. Are there slums and ghettos? Gentrification? The promo shows single detached houses seemingly quite close to city center.
Unhoused people do exist, and they vote for you so it's in there. Also shelters with real costs based on good data. Modeling slums is actually quite hard. There were unhoused camping sites in the early access version but I was unhappy with how it turned out and retired the feature back to the drawing board.
I want it to come back because it's in the spirit of the game not to hide the "ugly" aspects of city life.
There is gentrification in the way that landlords discriminate low income renters and NIMBYs have political power over you (in the form of the 'disagreement aura')
There's no rules against building single family homes in a city center, but the effect is what you would expect: non optimal tax revenue as you could zone it for something that's worth a lot more.
Does the AI have a say in what type of residential buildings are built, or is it all up to the player? If the AI is choosing, then there should be some way to naturally incentivize the landlords to build apartment towers where there is a higher demand, and cheaper housing in the suburbs where workers can't afford to pay higher rents.
Congrats on the game and I hope you're keeping some design notes as the balancing act between realism and gameplay will surely make for an interesting story.
I like that it's non-serious and contains jokes throughout the user interfaces. Reminds me a little of Airline Tycoon's non-serious/joking nature, and Theme Hospital if going further back in time. It makes the game fun rather than a boring simulator some city planner would use for work.
This looks great. I've had a quick look through the docs and can't see anything about bikes under transport, or, under housing, anything relating to modes of tenure that aren't private rentals (e.g. Vienna-style social housing, housing co-operatives, or private ownership). Would be lovely to play around with those variables.
Also, for finance, is there a particular reason why the finance sector calculations look quite simple (on the face of it, at least)? They seem only to be a percentage lift based on aura, rather than anything resembling any number of complex sectoral dynamics, from full rentier-financial domination to prudent support of industry/services.
Regarding the unit economics for finance sector, you are right, the calculations are way too simple, and I'm not entirely happy with it, so I'm looking to improve it, but it does need to be a sweet spot between 1. realistic enough to be educatioal and 2. simple enough you can use it as a gameplay mechanic.
Before the end of the year there will be mod support, and I will pay special attention to making sure that modders can swap the economic formulas for more sophisticated models.
Man looks amazing, the detail level of the simulation seems to be in another level compared to sity skylines and co.
If you need any help or just chat about this, reach out to contact (At) khorchani (dot)fr
Correct me if I'm wrong, but my understanding of the economy is that money is earned when someone creates value. Just "giving people money" without having the corresponding value be created increases demand for valuable things without increasing supply, leading to inflation and the costs of said things going up.
Money is earned either by extracting rents/profits/taxes, through borrowing or by selling something. None of these have to actually create value.
You can advertise something without value and “earn” money selling it. The perceived value was created by advertising, but didn’t actually exist.
You can raise funds, sell at a loss, buy out the competition and later drive up prices without creating any value. This is how Amazon got started.
You can go to the bank, borrow money(increasing the money supply, driving inflation, thanks to fractional reserve banking), buy up houses (driving housing inflation), and extract rent without doing anything useful for your community.
In fact, cloud computing is largely that: buying up all the compute and renting it out to those without the capital to buy themselves.
A person can create value without earning money (parenthood, volunteering), and one can earn money without creating value (rent extraction), although the word “earn” is under a lot of strain.
You're wrong. People have inherent value whether they "create value" or not. UBI is not about rewarding people for some economic contribution but rather provides everyone with a reasonable amount of money so they can survive (hopefully) and stay healthy and have a shot at the prerequisites for "freedom" to exist.
Money has been completely manufactured in financial markets already and doesn't seem to be screwing us over too badly. I hardly think UBI paid from taxing the largest economic surpluses and wealth in the history of the world will have a significant impact on inflation.
Any inflationary impact would happen if you print the money supply to pay UBI rather than using existing dollars in the supply.
You're also completely writing off the additional surpluses that people receiving UBI could provide if they're confident they can get by on a daily basis and also ensure they stayed healthy and working rather than spiraling any time one or two things go sideways.
In, say, the Netherlands we already have something that's very close to free money. I know many, many folks perusing said mechanism(s). Sure, it's not UBI and there is some stigma involved but I think it's the closest you'll get. I won't be snarky about this, but let's just say I need some.. convincing this reliably addresses the primary obstacles in economically disadvantaged folks. In my experience our economic situation is downstream from other more urgent issues that we find hard to talk about. Culture, ethics, behavioral and cognitive differences, etc. Thorny, nasty things, but .. real and more importantly they don't respond to dollar bills. In fact, it may make it worse.
But anyway, I'm not too worried about inflation mainly because of the points you raised, but I am worried about resource constrained markets like housing. If nothing is done to stop this, and I don't know how, I'm sure they'll just raise the prices to completely cancel out any UBI you'll pass around. It's not just housing either, but that's an obvious one.
> our economic situation is downstream from other more urgent issues that we find hard to talk about. Culture, ethics, behavioral and cognitive differences
I see it as exactly the opposite - culture, ethics, behavior differences etc are downstream of financial inequality. When people are financially insecure it becomes much harder to tolerate disagreement, and much easier to blame [insert whatever populist notion of enemy]. I think it would be easier to engage with people with opposing ideas, not seeing them as an existential threat, if you are not worried about housing, income or health insurance.
Cultural polarization is a deflection mechanism (both in the subconscious psychological sense as well as a politcal/propaganda technique) meant to mask the real deeper structural inequalities. It's the lie we tell ourselves and the powers that be tell us to prevent to change the direction of the "wealth redistribution" we've been witnessing for 20+ years.
So far in Croatia any kind of stimulus from the government just makes the market compensate. For example, an increase in public spending made the prices of goods and services more expensive and providing subsidies for first time home buyers caused prices of real estate to increase by that amount.
The real problem during the pandemic is most of the stimulus money went to the already wealthy. Higher cost of living is because we keep printing money, that money goes to banks, and inflation ends up being an implicit tax on the poor who aren't invested in the markets.
What I can definitely tell you is that the people that currently can't even afford basic things are somehow causing higher cost of living. The economy is not jacked up right now because we gave people laughably small amounts like a thousand dollars. The real problem is people like Sergei Brin spending 57 million dollars to fight a one-time 5% tax.
Pandemic checks were from expanding the money supply IIRC rather than distributed taxes on the already very wealthy. These are very different mechanisms. What they did (expanding the money supply) drove inflation way more than the actual money in people’s pockets. Otherwise you’d have argue people shouldn’t get paid because it causes too much inflation.
I checked my analytics recently and over 100 people have 100+ day streaks which kind of blows my mind!
I released custom player puzzles which has been a lot of fun! I’ve gotten dozens of submissions that I’m working through. People are submitting really clever and interesting puzzles. It’s fun to get to solve puzzles I didn’t make myself! There’s more I want to do here (featured puzzles, categories, etc.)
I think I’ve also tracked down an issue that was causing the game to crash on older iPhones. I’m having playtesters run through it now and hope to deploy tomorrow. (Switching some positioning rules from CSS transforms to SVG coordinates)
I recently made some puzzle brainstorming tools using the Datamuse API which have been very helpful for brainstorming words related to a theme.
I’m starting to debate some monetized features. So far everything is free but it would be nice if my wife and I could dedicate more time to this. If I could get a few thousand dollars a month in subscriptions my wife could quit her job and focus more on puzzle creation and improving the game. If you play and have ideas for features you pay for I’d love to hear them!
I had shared the game with the wife when I first saw it here on HN. She told me just a couple of days ago that she is still playing it fairly regularly!
Opening a new maker space in Berkeley, July 3rd Noon-Midnight. Founded by 2 guys in a basement 9 years ago. Now opening it up to the community of local makers as a non-profit 501(c)(3). 3D print, laser cutters, CNC, full e-bench. https://eastbaymakersclub.com
This is extremely impressive, something I’ve always wanted to create locally. I’m in the UK so setup, registration, costs etc are very different but what’s the ballpark cost? We have a real lack of maker spaces.
Awesome. If you are not in touch with Maker Nexus (based out of Sunnyvale) already, please reach out! Would love to put you in touch with the administrators there on what they learned about successfully running a non-profit maker space.
Been learning electronic PCB design the last few weeks while retrofitting some IKEA window shades for Zigbee enabled motorization.
I've really enjoyed the journey of 3D printing and being able to create all kinds of mechanically useful things over the last few years, but I had always wanted to go even further and incorporate some non-trivial custom electronics.
For this project I had a space constraint for the motor controller board, so while I could have probably hacked together a working perfboard, it just wasn't going to be satisfying. So I finally took the plunge and spent 40 or so hours in KiCad learning how read IC reference documents, picking components, and of course, doing the PCB trace layout.
It's really just a 12v→5v buck circuit, all the plumbing and ancillary components for connecting a ESP32 module to a couple motor driver ICs, and some headers, but it is completely mine!
Just got 5 of my boards in the mail from JLCPCB the other day (insane turnaround, less than a week) and was very happy to find that the entire circuit worked perfectly! I did spend a fair amount of time going over the design with Claude though, so I think that paid off (the kicad files are plaintext, so it made easy work of understanding what I was doing).
I wanted to see the schematic in a README.md on GitHub. (Saves me having to d/l the KiCad files, open them.) It would be cool if you added that to the repo.
This is how it starts my friend. Before you know it you have a lot of projects 90% done and living in production without ever getting the last 10% before you think of something new! Currently I'm refactoring a lot of homebrew ESPhome devices to use the ESP32-H2 as it supports Thread. This allows me to remove weak IoT SSIDs while expanding my Thread network node count for better mesh.
Ah I picked the C6 for it's Zigbee support, I've completely avoided WiFi IoT devices where I can in my apartment. I haven't explored thread at all yet though. Thread / Matter seems like it's going to be more open than zigbee, and potentially easier to develop for?
Looks much better than a typical beginner, congrats. As someone with a bit of experience (and a degree) I'd just suggest that you avoid breaking up the ground plane so much. It's the single most important rule for PCB design. Traces on that side should only be short links to jump around a trace on the top side, where possible. It matters the most for SMPS, RF, etc.
Appreciate the feedback! I was having a hard time finding anyone with design experience in my social circle, so I mostly relied on asking Claude if something was or wasn't conventional. I did try to keep my ground pour free of bottle-necks.
I've seen even pros make all kinds of mistakes, since PCB layout isn't really a focus of EE education. It's interesting that you've done so well with Claude. The usual temptation of beginners is to treat layout as a spatial puzzle to minimize area, but that's like minimizing LOC by reusing one letter global variables. The goal should be to maximize the quality of the important signals. If you need to make it smaller, you just add more layers.
The basic rule is that current flows in a loop, which means on both sides of the board. Every time there is a gap in the ground plane, current has to take a different path on the top and bottom sides. The further apart these paths are, the more like an antenna/transformer winding they act - picking up and emitting high frequency noise.
The simplest strategy is to keep all traces on the top mostly horizontal. Whenever a trace needs to cross the others, you add some vias and route it vertically on the opposite side.
After 1.5 years of development and two exhausting pivots, I’m incredibly happy to finally have our v1 live!
While most of the HR tech is rushing to use black-box AI, I built the exact opposite. It's a transparent, math-driven fitness engine. It extracts objective data from CVs and calculates how well applicants match requirements, letting you see the reasoning behind why someone scored an X%.
If anyone here builds in the HR space or regularly hires engineers, I would absolutely love your feedback or a roast of the landing page.
PS This is a project of immense importance for me, I've been working on for past ~2 years, I'd appreciate to know why this comment is flagged.
I'm curious how you're addressing any legal aspects about this:
> No black-box AI. Every candidate gets a detailed match receipt explaining exactly why they scored an 85%, complete with contextual evidence from their CV.
HR teams like to play dead when they actually have a file with detailed feedback on a candidate. Yet, they choose to keep that to themselves out of baseless legal fear. I wonder how that works out when somebody proves a company's filter consistently proves a specific bias gets rejected systematically.
and
> Automated assignment validation
which is particularly troubling for devs: companies scaling assignments as first screen. How do you get around "AI evaluating AI" loops especially about assignments ?
Recruiters aren’t afraid to give feedback, and there are often no legal grounds for withholding it in Europe (I’m not counting FAANG companies or certain sectors like fintech). Usually, they simply don’t have the time (and enough motivation) to provide individual feedback to every applicant. This leads to ghosting and transitively to the brand reputational damage. Hiring Method allows you to send feedback to almost everyone!
In our software, the candidate being assessed does not know all the assessment criteria. Furthermore, this assessment is merely a starting point for discussion during the technical round. I need to update the description of this feature.
For a while a "cv2vec" lingered in my mind, but abandoned it due to the sheer volume of PII I'd need.
How do you deal with CVs like mine that refuse to list every <fancy keyword> I'm familiar with because it's pointless clutter? In that sense, and IME, the companies that only hire perfect fits are, more often than not, toxic.
Hiring Method is an auxiliary tool that does not take any hiring decision. The vector it builds has few dozen parameters, with hard skills (eg plain old technology list) constituting a mere fraction. In this way you do not have to have all fancy buzzwords – the software also checks for neighboring stacks and transferrability level, among other fitness criteria.
Everyone is building scoring with AI and everyone is providing clues like:
These are the 5 things we will score each candidate on, and here is how the candidates scored against each item. And here is the total score because of it.
As someone who worked on HR Tech in 2024-2025, I think you're really solving a problem here. Cat is out of the bag already it's not like HR can go back to the pre-AI world ... I'm also puzzled by the flags. Congrats on your project :)
I sort of wish employers would use this and also the applicants could see the metric. How much time would be saved if neither side bothered with bad fits?
fewer than 2–3% of the 300–500 applicants for a software engineer role progress to the next stage after CV screening (to put it very broadly). at this stage alone, Hiring Method saves between a few hours and several days per role, whilst maintaining impartiality and processing 100% of applicants
Interesting, but given an easy access to AI, employers would get hundreds if not thousands of wonderfully written, properly suited CV. And everyone will have cool Github portfolio (with AI-generated projects). Good luck finding the right person in such environment.
So I am wondering what kind of tooling would be able to somehow spot the right people among flood of AI slops.
flags or downvotes probably come from people being skeptical about automated CV evaluation. in europe this is also legally questionable.
also matching requirements should be secondary to experience. someone who has done a few react websites will not be as qualified for your react job as someone that has done 10 years of angular and vue and can learn react in a short time.
I am making Cargo for C. I have 3/4 of a working demo; the tool can build itself, including some non-trivial dependencies which I've ported to build natively with the tool (instead of wrapping their Make or CMake or whatever).
The pitch: It's insane that we have to pull in Python or Lua to build C code. CMake is an abomination against god that has become usable in spite of itself. Zig cc is proof that this entire ecosystem is an embarrassment. My tool gives C projects a TOML manifest, and builds scripts written in C and JIT compiled by the tool. Now, you can write build scripts in the language itself, pull in dependencies you wanted to use anyway.
It also provides a stable ABI. There's an HTTP-backed index and a Git-backed index. And it generally does the same thing for C that, say,
Bun did for JS/TS. You'll be able to run C files from source and have the entire ecosystem available. You'll be able to trivially generate single file static binaries, or dynamically link to an older glibc without arcane tricks. It will fix C.
I'm also still working on my "what if we wrote a real standard library for C"; I added some feedback I got from the release.
FWIW not many C/C++ programmers like package managers for some reason. We wrote custom cmake to pull from Artifactory and built our own packages with zip files. There isn’t a rich ecosystem of C/C++ packages.
Still plugging away at Breaka Club, where kids take photos of their hand drawn art and build games using it. Starts out as no-code, photograph an AprilTag and it imbues the image with functionality.
I'm running an in school pilot this week (Lunch time school club).
The tech stack for the main product is honestly pretty intense at this point with full multiplayer support, offline play, transitioning from client authoritative to joining a remote server. Built atop GodotJS, TypeScript bindings for Godot, which I maintain. Huge monorepo with over a million lines (yes, I'm aware that's NOT a good thing), and GodotJS itself is not included in that.
My wife and I are working on a math/science/CS-inspired jewelry business.
We try to create pieces that stand on their own aesthetically but have a hidden meaning. We currently have two styles: lambda calculus based pieces (we depict the lambda/Tromp diagram) where we have Y-Combinator earrings (well, strictly speaking they are one beta reduction away from Y-combinator. Aesthetic oblige) and a pendant depicting a lambda expression computing Graham's number. The other style is quantum computing circuits, based on quantum computing research my brother (a physics professor) is doing: a pendant that is actually a non-local controlled-NOT gate.
I wrote a tiny DSL to describe the jewelry pieces, and an interpreter to produce CAD files. We then either 3D print them or have them produced by lost-wax.
We are 200% out of our comfort zone (and love it): I know nothing of front end dev, payments, or anything like that. The diamond district in New York is a neighborhood we normally actively avoid, but if you are forced to go there it is fascinating (people examining diamonds on the corner of the street, others in fur coats in summer straight out of a mafia movie...), and especial marketing. Jewelry is a completely saturated business (luckily we are not doing this to pay the rent); we think we have a unique angle, but we are still figuring out the target audience (if there is one).
After getting the top spot in What Are You Working On in Feb 2025 ( https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=43157056 ) I started a company on that idea at https://getcomper.ai . After solo building for 11 months I found a co-founder, got an angel investment, then got some ex-Miro folk on board and we are now building the product at breakneck speed.
We're a collaborative canvas + context engine for all the code and docs in your company, with a zoomable UI + CLI , where you can collaborate with your co-workers and agents.
We map technical debt, agent readiness, code complexity, security scanning, bus factor and more, so you can easily see how all the software in your company runs.
One of the most complex things is our incremental git blame engine built on top of GitOxide, as our backend is fully built on Rust. Our frontend is built on PixiJS so you can explore at gaming speed with 60Hz refresh rates.
Recently we sponsored Rust Week in Europe and a hundred or so developers tried our mini-game which is GeoGuessr for code, and got rave reviews. Future is looking bright!
we do a very comprehensive scan in multiple dimensions: git blame history, llm passes over every file and a tree-sitter analysis for cognitive complexity. We bring our opinionated approach for tools (do you have linters, CI/CD, static typing, agent docs) and score each aspect. We also create your architecture diagrams with our secret agent sauce, and map technical debt on each level of the C4 hierarchy.
This looks super cool. I even upvoted your last year's post. Great to see you have come so far ahead. Any chance you are hiring? I have 3 years of exp building software especially 0-1s. I specialize in backend and currently working as a Product Engineer at a Series C startup leading their 0-1 AI initiatives.
I'm finally fulfilling a childhood dream of restoring a Heathkit oscilloscope. I managed to nab a functioning IO-12 at the thrift store for $75!
Don't tell my husband that I spent more than $200 on parts and supplies for it.
I've wanted a Heathkit since I learned about them as a teenager, and this is the first one I've ever seen in the wild. The original owner left the date he assembled it and his callsign written on the inside! I looked him up and he died in 2013, but by sheer happenstance I'm restoring it 58 years to the day that he initially built it. I got super lucky with this unit because as far as I can tell, it's only been run a few hours in its entire life. I really only have to replace aged components because they're physically breaking down, I expect the thing will outlive me once I'm done with it. Can't wait to hand it off to a bewildered young EE in another half century.
This is really cool! My dad always talked about the one he had when he was much younger.
In a similar vein I’m teaching my son to rebuild an old ‘62 VW that’s been in the family since ‘62 and am constantly reminded of how nice it is when things are simple. And I’ve learned that the dollars spent are not that important when you are having fun and learning or teaching something!
I’m working on an open cave registry for the Western Tatra Mountains.
The Tatras may look solid from the outside, but our mountains are hollow inside - and there is still a lot to discover. The project brings together cave survey data, entrances, maps, and terrain models into one open spatial dataset.
This is the first year I made more money selling art than I did freelancing web dev. I just incorporated and formalized my web dev business (https://lcdbmg.com). A couple of weeks later I got a booth at an art festival and ended up selling many prints (https://lucidbeaming.com). I think the universe is telling me something.
I have done festivals before, so I knew what to expect. One thing I had this time was accepting credit cards and apple pay through an NFC app on my phone. Most people paid with apple pay and were glad I accepted it. Being in a sales booth is awkward at times, but I made friends with the other exhibitors. I had some good conversations with people.
4 years later and I'm still working on ntfy. Trying to make push notifications easy as pie. I would have never thought that it would blow up like this. It's still a lot of fun, and I've learned a lot. Thanks everyone for your support and for your amazing ideas and contributions. Open source is awesome. HN ist awesome. https://github.com/binwiederhier/ntfy
I'm not working on anything that interesting at the moment, but I just wanted to say that these threads are absolutely my favorite part of HN. Just so much creativity and hard work on display.
I've been working on a linux/amd64 compiler for a simple scripting language, it barely seems worth discussing as many people have created their own languages, and it's done just for learning/fun rather than in an attempt to be serious.
But seeing the projects other people work on is fascinating, and always interesting. (Ignoring all the "agent .." stuff, I can never be too excited about.)
My wife and I continue to work on Uruky [1], a simpler Kagi alternative, based in the EU.
Last month we launched image search (got out of beta this month), added our own index and crawler (via Uruky Site Search [2]), and reached 100 monthly active accounts (we’ve passed 150 now)! You can also see a privacy-focused independent blogger wrote about us [3]!!
You can check out the main differences between Uruky and Kagi, DuckDuckGo, SearXNG, etc. in the footer (right side), but one huge difference is that with Uruky, after being a paying customer for 12 months, you can download a copy of the source code (licensed as BUSL into AGPLv3 in 2 years — a suggestion made here in HN)!
You can also now get a free trial for 2 hours when you signup if you pass a proof-of-work captcha (another suggestion made here on HN, and it uses a local Altcha).
Our main challenge continues to be discoverability and outreach because we want to do it ethically. Ideas are welcome! We’ve been sponsoring open source projects, open source maintainers, and indie, small-web, and privacy-related websites and applications.
Feature-wise, for June we’ve already added a ton of personalization and privacy-increasing features like URL rewrites, cash-by-mail payments, and anonymous vouchers! Upcoming is partnering with ProxyStore to sell vouchers (we’re currently in talks for this), so you can buy vouchers with XMR/Monero or other cryptocurrencies. Then we’ll be looking into increasing our own index, focused on indie/small web.
Oh, wow, thanks for sharing, I wasn’t aware of that post! We’ve tried to reach out to European Alternetives before, but never got a reply, unfortunately.
Thank you so much! We would definitely love to have that happen, too! We couldn’t have imagined we’d get to 100 monthly active accounts so soon (and now past 150), but we’d need at least an order of magnitude more in order to have it be sustainable as a full time business for us.
That being said, it definitely looks possible, so we’re excited! As it stands, it’s already sustainable part-time and can go long-term.
Uruky sounds like the google that we used to have: one that's just good because it returns relevant results, not because of ecosystem lock-in.
That being said, can't help noticing the [NO-AI] at the beginning of the post, and I wonder whether it would help adaption if you also make the search engine available to agents for paid customers.
Thanks for commenting! We do not "forbid" AI or are "anti-AI". You can use agents within the rate limits (which are public in the FAQ).
We don't plan to build AI tools into the search (specifically Gen AI/LLMs).
But the tag mostly indicates that the product is built "by hand", not "vibe-coded", and that it's not about an AI-related product/service, if that makes sense.
3 hours trying to remove an oil filter from tractor. Chain clamp mishaped it, I ended up shredding it, ripped out the innards, all the tin down to the intake rim (yes, shredded metal everywhere) until finally used needle nose spread open in two of the intake holes and a plummers wrench for torque finally loosened it.
Reading Brand's quick little life changer kept me going with surprisingly few cuss fits:
My go to for these (was a tractor mechanic early in life) is to start with a big flat blade screwdriver and knock it completely through the side of the filter to the other side with a hammer, then use that to break the filter loose. I’ve near had one go sideways with that method, you get it through both outside sheet metal and the inner perforated metal that is usually stronger and welded to the threads
Absolutely tried that. The tin gave up faster than Khalid at Zanzibar. It looked like Popeye used his pipe on it. It was a cheap 1384, so single wall and cardboard were the only resistance.
Since posting, I got it running, PTO and deck line up great, fuel filter is clean and clear, it runs better than it has in years.
I bet you're right. First time using a chain clamp, and it was brandnew. Broke on the third pull. Might have to watch a video - maybe I used it wrong? Seemed pretty straight forward and I wanted something that would span several filter types.
I fell down the rabbit hole of voice transcription about a year ago, always had a love for utilising fine tuned LLMs so have put two and two together and built https://whistle-enterprise.com. The biggest challenge being it all running on CPU with the target device being your low to mid spec office laptop that's a few years old (I5, 8gb RAM). All nicely packaged together in a single completely offline selfcontained app that you just install and run (no environment setups, packages to download, models to download etc).
One of the hardest parts I've found is the diarisation (who said what) side of things. Trying to tune this and have it working in a way that doesn't absolutely grind the laptop to a halt or take forever to complete has been _hard_ but also extremely rewarding.
Another part has been the fine tuning side of the Phi-4 model, I'm on version 10 now, getting that pipeline down was a journey in itself, but I've got some great results. I wrote a bit about it in a comment here - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48385906#48389625
I absolutely love working on this, I still wake up and the first thing I think about is voice transcription pipelines (sad I know), but I'm excited to see how much further performance and utility I can squeeze out.
Are we the same person?? Haha, this is super close to the scope of work I've been doing and just released. Different objectives though. It sounds like yours prioritizes legacy hardware and is more enterprise focused (good for you!). Mine is focused more on long-term project tracking and program management for solo developers or solo builders.
I also got hammered when it came to diarization... I found that the biggest pain was creating an appropriate environment for cross-compatibility of the different backends required for whisper/faster-whisper/pyannote. It's especially challenging on older systems, so major kudos for giving it a shot.
Have you gotten any traction yet from the community?
> Mine is focused more on long-term project tracking and program management for solo developers or solo builders.
This looks very useful, will download and give it a shot later. It took me a few seconds to find it on your page, and only got to the screenshots in the "navigate" sections after clicking through a lot. I would suggest putting a screenshot or something on the landing page so people can see and understand what it is.
Thank you, it's nice to hear someone else has gone through similar pain (in a good way)!
It's been slow and steady, but it's hard. I've commented previously that whilst the cost to build software has plummeted compared to 2 or 3 years ago, the ability to sell it has got harder and I feel this will keep accelerating.
This was built just for them so I've not spent too much time on the UI (ignore `unstable` in the name, it's just not on a proper release branch) but it's completely free so give it a go if you want. I'm working on the diarisation step so it can tag subtitles to people but that's not ready yet.
It utilises nvidia Parakeet as the ASR model, it is very much European language focused, the supported ones are:
If these languages aren't what you're looking for let me know what you need and I'll see what I can do.
I use subtitles extensively for everything I watch, so if I can help someone make older movies more accessible with them then that would make me happy.
I've been working on releasing an app for maintenance tracking for home. I've always had problems with having in my calendar to replace a battery in my chicken coop every year, then things come up and I end up replacing the battery a few weeks later, so I have to go and change my calendar event. Or fertilizing my hops every two weeks only in the summer. Then in the winter I am getting notified every two weeks. So I built a simple app for tracking those with floating repetition and seasonality. [0]
Also recently got a lot of home VHS tapes digitalized and always had trouble with playing from Google drive or finding the right video. So I just built a webapp this month to split the videos into clips, transcoding it for better streaming, Google casting support, and tagging for search. [1]
Not to be a Debbie downer but Tody already handles home maintenance tracking, and it's already close to perfect IMO. What does your app offer that Tody doesn't? I can't download it because it's iOS only.
Looking at Toby, it seems to be mainly a cleaning app, it's built for stuff that gets dirty again, like vacuuming and counters. My app I made it do one thing really good and not have to much clutter. Mainly the once-a-year, easy-to-forget things like changing water filters, fuel filters, changing oil, trimming apple trees, etc. It does things Tody isn't built for, like auto-scheduling the next service the moment you finish one, only nagging you about gutters in the right season, and tracking multiple properties if you've got a rental or a cabin. So, while technically I can use my app for cleaning purposes (e.g. set every week change sheets, vacuum floor), I use it for things that happen once a year, only in certain seasons, before winter, every 3 years, etc. And I don't have to worry about the things that might be weeks or months, or years away.
Tody (not Toby) is a scheduling app exactly as you describe that you are building and theres no "clutter." You can use it to schedule tasks on any interval, and seasonally. Literally it's exactly what you are describing.
Dismissing it as "built for stuff that gets dirty again, like vacuuming and counters" just means you didn't even look at it. Saying it doesn't support "only nagging you about gutters in the right season" is a lie, it absolutely supports that. I use it to schedule household tasks exactly as you describe, and even personal tasks like applying night cream (every 3 days) and doing my hair treatment (every 60 days).
You can also easily track multiple properties, just set each property is an "area."
I don't know why you can't just say "I'm building it because I want to build something" instead of pretending that the thing you're building doesn't already exist.
I've built tons of things but next to zero adoption. Its SUPER easy to build now, near impossible to get people to use your things. As long as you are getting value out of them... that is all that matters. At least that is what I tell myself.
Mainly https://www.vaava.app/ is a baby tracking/logging app I originally built for myself, now available on both app stores. All the user generated data is stored only on device and is transferred in local network to users who you have paired the app with. There is 0 behavioural analytics, even the crashlytics are 100% optional.
There is a couple of semi-unique features; you can use your voice to dictate and generate events (feeding, sleep etc), you can also scan documents for growth measurements.
You don't need user account to use it, there is no subscription, the paid features are available behind a single purchase for lifetime. Still, like 90% of the features are available for free.
Also
https://www.athilio.com/ privacy focused, highly customisable personal data analytics for your Oura, Garmin, Polar and Apple Health (ios port coming soon). Of course there is couple of AI features (with a single switch to turn all off), originally those were built just so I would learn how to embed agents in sw products myself. The whole app was originally built for personal use to fix missing features in the manufacturers own platforms:
- Period over period comparisons (this month vs this month last year)
- Comparing different metrics
- Customizable graphs and other widgets
- And of course combining the manufacturers metrics (oura for sleep, garmin for training etc etc)
Existing solutions for this kind of software seem to have focus on social (strava), or coaching (training peaks), or they are just straight up crazy expensive with their paid tier (both tp and strava for example).
Thanks! Yeh focusing on privacy is good differentiator, large established players just cant really compete in that area in a similar manner. It also reduces operational load from myself when I dont hoard user data. And of course the customer gets a service that respects their privacy. But when focusing on privacy there needs to be adjustments and compromises on UX and such in some areas, but you got to so say no to somethings when sticking to your values!
I've been thinking a lot about soul cultivation as a concept, and the general structure of the soul, and doing a bit of writing on the topic. I feel like this topic is surprisingly under-discussed and under-explored relative to how impactful it is. By soul I mean "the part of you that is an observer", in case this isn't clear. I think a lot of discourse gets caught up with metaphysical speculation instead of focusing on what is there and what is knowable.
Most recently I was also probing people about how they conceptualize of the soul, making my own drawings, and asking others for drawings. If you have a few minutes I would also be interested in seeing how you would draw a soul, given pen and paper or equivalent materials. It often feels like for a lot of people the concept of the soul gets comingled with very confusing definitions.
There's a general problem where certain concepts become so overloaded that just disambiguating and clarifying what is meant becomes a challenge. I will note that if your first thought or question is whether the soul is even real, you might be confused about the definition or we might be referring to different concepts.
> By soul I mean "the part of you that is an observer"
This is a nice notion, but it's not how the existing literature (going back very long) generally uses the term "soul." Conventionally speaking the term soul is theological and has ties to modes of spiritual salvation as it is considered a substance that persists beyond human mortality. What you're describing seems more like the term "self" or "ego" or "conscious awareness" as those terms are used in philosophy. You're welcome to create your own definitions, but if they trample over the prior art of the terms in literature that is hundreds if not thousands of years old then that's going to almost certainly lead to the confusion you say you're noticing among people.
for what it's worth my drawing of "the part of me that is the observer" would look like some subset of the brain.
A small thing I've been building as an antidote to doomscrolling. Open a new tab and see a public domain artwork from a real museum: https://toregard.art
Mostly I wanted more art and colour in my workday - something to look at, learn through and draw inspiration from in the moments between meetings and code. You can create an account to save your favourites and curate your own gallery. Just released collections that you can make public.
Art from: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Art Institute of Chicago. Rijksmuseum. Cleveland Museum of Art.
I’m working on a tensor computing language/compiler called i with a simple explicit scheduling model (loop splitting, loop ordering, input “staging”). These mechanisms alone are enough to express complex algorithms like FlashAttention, generating target code with techniques like loop fusion, minimized intermediate allocations, and “online” reductions.
Right now there is a runtime and compiler targeting C, written in dependency-free Rust, and a minimal Python frontend. The project is very much proof-of-concept stage so not yet fast. Working on a CUDA backend now.
The goal is to enable automatic discovery of FlashAttention-style optimizations which is not feasible with current compilers.
Very open to feedback/discussion from anybody interested in or knowledgeable about tensor compilers!
Still early days. Im making it as I have a couple of friends who were not so thrilled with the tools out there specifically for the app store. They mentioned how important it was to their income to track the positioning of their apps on stores. If their app dropped to #2, that would be a huge hit to their income.
Happy to have any feedback - but its far from complete
During my 45 min commute to work I listen to podcasts. Over the last year, like most here, I have been focusing on AI and agentic engineering. The podcasts that I enjoyed the most profiled research papers.
In April I started playing round with generating a semi-automated pipeline with python and Claude to generate a private podcast that does a deep dive into AI research papers. I think it is really cool. It fetches papers, scores them based on novelty, importance, relevancy, etc., and then writes the podcast script. It then generates the show by using Eleven Labs voices and then puts it in an RSS feed that Apple Podcasts is ok with.
My personal expense for generating this stuff is a sunk cost, so in May I opened it to everyone via https://paperdive.ai/ It was really fun working with Claude 4.7, 4.8 and even Fable 5, to make the site and refine the pipeline. Now I put out about 4-5 episodes a day. I listen to each one first, then promote the "staged" episodes to my "prod" feed.
This weekend I just add weekly and monthly reviews. Claude will write the review and another instance will generate a script the converts the review into something (hopefully) easier to listen to.
Now, during my commute, I listen to the individual episodes and the reviews - I typically run them at 1.5x to 2x speed. I have become a much better user of the AI tools by keeping up with recent research.
Really cool! I recently did something similar. I drop links to articles in a WebUI Claude built and it uses Haiku to clean it up a bit to a transcript then Kokoro TTS locally to make audio.
I consume the same way. RSS in Apple Podcasts. Such a great way to spend time in the car since it’s so personally curated.
Really great idea and very well executed. Not sure how much I can listen to those voices though, it's quite monotonous, although they're quite relaxing.
https://banksia.bio - I think private personal genome sequencing is an underserved market. I'm trying to start a "Mullvad VPN"-esque service where I as a provider do not need your personal information to perform the sequencing. Very much a WIP at the moment :)
Agreed that it's an underserved market (personal genome sequencing).
Do you own or have access to a sequencing platform / machine? Or do you just buy and prepare kits, and then send the prepared sample out for sequencing?
Two months ago I went full time on my indie game after just under a year and a half of part time work. I’ve been prototyping in Godot for about 6 years now, and finally had a game that my business partner and I were really interested in and felt matched the current market desires. It’s cozy world builder, drawing inspiration for Sim City, Rollercoaster Tycoon, The Sims, with an aesthetic influence of Stardew Valley, Animal Crossing, and the like.
This was very much a passion project and an idea I’ve wanted to see alive for decades, and also let me explore some tech I wanted to get deeper on. I’m bullish on the the tighter integration of CPUs, GPU style cores, and shared memory. Our game, LocoMo, relies heavily of GPU processing of entities under the hood.
Interesting project! The zoom-out revealing a much larger map was really cool after having spent time in the zoomed in view without suspecting there was much more to see around! One thing I'm curious about in these kind of sandbox games is the emerging behaviors we could see and that I feel can bring a lot of life to virtual worlds. Do you already know what platforms you will be targeting?
The emergent behavior is very much our end goal, it’s the reason everything is very systems oriented, and we’re trying to put as much control in the players hands as possible. One of our biggest remaining efforts is adding the depth to the villagers under the hood, and integrating tons of little animations and interactions, but we’re confident on the vision!
Targeting (and wishlist-able now!) Steam first, with development actively happening on Windows, Mac, Linux and the Steam Deck. Closely followed by mobile, where I’ve currently got iOS builds working for a proof of concept, just not proper controls. After that we’d love to target consoles.
It’s such an untapped domain, and despite the consoles being more tightly integrated this generation, we’re still mostly using the horsepower for traditional AAA realism-focused graphics, as opposed to this whole new world of computation available.
Edit: Also, thank you! The game has evolved a ton over the last year and is really coming into its own stylistically, bit by bit.
It’s a project of the non-profit Open Transit Software Foundation that we’re using to fund our other initiatives, like bringing real-time transit information to billions of people around the world.
Since last month, I've added a layer of polish to the product, added support for deploying a SMS and phone gateway to realtime transit information, and built out the marketing website to include solutions pages for higher education, SMS, and more.
All of this depends on a bunch of really cool open source projects we’re building, like Maglev, a Golang server that can power realtime transit apps. Maglev is already being used in production, and you can set up a local install in about 15 minutes: https://opentransitsoftwarefoundation.org/2026/04/setting-up...
The other OSS projects we have include: building data products, iOS and Android apps, web apps, a Pebble watch app(!), and too many others to list. See them all here: https://github.com/onebusaway/
Lets you explore, filter, and rank locations (ZIP/counties/tracts) in the US to find places to move to and/or invest in. ~470 attributes with tons of customization (e.g., distance to work or the nearest hospital) and a ton of custom attributes (so it's not just an ACS viewer :-) ).
Based on a prototype/real need I had when I purchased my current house. Generic "Top 10 ZIP codes" aren't all that helpful (unless you fit that exact niche) and existing tools were either hyper focused on institutional investors (that want to build a subdivison whether it makes sense to live there or not), unaffordable, or both.
Since it's HN, stack is React/MapLibre/go backend + tile cache, data work is done largely in DuckDB.
I've been turning my Media Viewer into a complete local first media ecosystem for automated tagging, a media server, phone swiping, and a web version of the viewer so you can access it remotely. https://lowkeyviewer.com/
The thing Im most proud of though is just the viewer, its designed to just open all the images and videos in a folder, and then there is no UI except a right click context menu, the list is a grid or a masonry layout that uses 100% of the space for the images/video so you can just navigate them. It adds anything you open to a local sqlite db so you can tag things if you want optionally. Also control modes that make sense for either a mouse or a laptop trackpad.
Can it be used to watch series? I mean, does it track what was already played? I've read the description but it seems that this is a totally different beast.
Its not really designed for that, but its something I think about adding sometimes. Its really more for people who tend to archive random videos and images from all over and want to browse them in a pleasant way. My library is full of memes, science images, archive.org scrapes, artist scrapes, comics, youtube videos, etc.
Yeah, also VR devices. Right now im mostly focused on getting the media server depdendency management and install process more user friendly, it works, but can require a little trouble shooting to get everything working.
An offline-first app to make life a little easier for someone I love and her caregiver. She's been diagnosed with stage 3 pancreatic cancer and food has been a bit of a nightmare for her. Her partner is also not very skilled with cooking, so helping them make this easier is my gift to them. Not a medical device, just a food logging and logistics tool. The privacy aspect of this is very important, so
I am so careful not to let anything not heavily encrypted touch a network request. Sync is opt-in, offline is default. This is very challenging for me, but I want to help her the best way I know: building software for humans.
I'm working on a proposal for C++29 to extend `std::execution` by introducing a type-erased sender (P4223 https://wg21.link/p4223).
I discovered this week, while the paper was being reviewed by SG1, that I've accidentally stumbled into tackling a rather important problem. Senders as shipped in C++26 can really only express the async equivalent of inline functions because, except for `task`, all the standard senders fully encode the shape of their computation in their type. With something like the `function` I'm proposing, you can use senders to express async algorithms that are separately compiled, just like sync functions.
If the feature lands in a shape similar to what I've proposed in P4223R0, then I think an obvious extension is to modify the core language to support a newer kind of "coroutine" that allows you to define a sender with imperative code. My vision here is that we act on the observation that `std::execution` is a language feature implemented in the library by teaching the compiler how to turn imperative C++ with `co_await`s sprinkled through it into the corresponding sender and operation state. I think this would open the door to putting async object lifetime analysis and optimization where it belongs (in the compiler) without the overheads and inconveniences of C++20 coroutines. It would even let us apply the inliner to async functions when the compiler can see the body of an async callee, not just its declaration.
For now, my next step is to write P4223R1 to incorporate feedback from this past week's WG21 meeting, and continue exploring the design space around specifying sender attributes for a `function`—I'm thinking the current approach of specifying query function signatures needs to be replaced with a key-value object like receiver environments, but I'm not sure yet what consequences that change would have on the design.
- Visual Guide to Number Theory: write up which explains the field of number theory in a visual manner.
- Reenvision technologies: simple software. Local first - no added complexity. Infinite scale without having to add 100 front-end UI frameworks: simple Python, CSS, and JS with SQLite. The design is absolutely breathtaking and beautiful and it is built people first (let's worry about scale later).
- Simple LLM: an LLM which doesn't need a GPU to function. It uses Hebbian learning with extreme compression and attempts to achieve 'reasoning ability' through using a in-built Prolog interpreter. It very much resembles a human being in it's 'thinking mode' so far but still far from perfect.
- Simple-Education: local first software for parents looking to provide home-schooling for their children. It makes learning easy and fun and uses best practices to maximise your child's chance of success.
- About a dozen other projects which I've started but I need help on. If you want to team up -- I will give you equal equity in my start-ups. I cannot offer you a salary though I'm not at the point yet where I can do that: but I will give you equal equity in anything that you want to work on together with me. I have over 100 different million dollar ideas that will make us wealthy if you want to join my team, so PM me if you're interested.
I made Beacon, a tiny iOS app for answering: “which of my friends is free to talk right now?”
It’s basically a one-to-many phone call that only one person can answer. Send a beacon to a group, and everyone gets rung at the same time. The first person who answers gets connected for a 1-1 call, and for everyone else the signal drops silently. No missed-calls or pressure to answer. Works pretty well given most people keep their phones on silent (and there are in-app settings for quiet hours too).
iOS/TestFlight only for now. It works best if you're able to join with at least four people you don't speak with as much as you'd like. I have a couple dozen connections on the app now, and it feels like magic to me. Would love feedback from both introverts and extroverts who still like phone calls, or wish they had more of them:
Working on my version of Dynamicland. Today I got this small thing working where I can now live-edit the behaviour of the editor script, see https://www.youtube.com/shorts/ZjxPIv-XwoU
I made a book, Simple Machines Made Simple, and I got about 11k copies shipped to my house about two weeks ago. I'm now trying to fix all the books and get them shipped out. They are books with little mini demos in them, and about 80% of the books need some type of rework. So it's going to be a long few months.
I also made Computer Engineering for Babies which I've posted about on here a couple times before.
That's a really fun project! What kind of issues are you facing that requires that much rework? Is it that the manufacturing of the book wasn't precise enough and the mini demos don't work perfectly?
Beyond the target age of your book but when I was 7-8 years old my favorite book was a science book that had interactive experiments. Hope your book leaves the same kind of positive and memorable impression on kids.
- The car that parked nearby last night coincided with a "Derek's Galaxy Buds" device with MAC address aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff. The buds also drove by briefly the previous night.
- Alert on sudden cross-specturm disturbance (e.g. burglars using a cheap jammer to disable WiFi cameras).
- Alert on known device contact loss (powered off / left premises).
- Review device movement across a campus/neighborhood (using multiple listening pods).
I have a working PoC. It can run on a cheap, low-power computer (e.g. Raspberry Pi) supporting multiple RF sensors (BT/BLE/WiFi). Has a web UI. Can publish events to an external security system. Currently working on an LLM interface to make it trivial for a non-technical operator to set policies and ask questions about events.
Could be sold as an appliance or a license for a DIY build.
Seed investors are welcome to contact rf-monitor@tuta.com
I'm building a P2P distributed computing mesh that runs in the browser. It's a TS library that provides a few things:
- A WS + WebRTC mesh
- A request/response protocol incentivizing the closest or most efficient peers to respond to requests
- A WASM environment ensuring deterministic execution and supporting contract composition
- Collateralization around responses, ensuring invalid responses have amortized negative value
- A consensus and UTXO layer, focused on low-latency, low-finality micropayments (for request incentive and collateral), using WASM compute as the weight metric
The idea came out of me wondering a few years ago why a multiplayer game couldn't simply be run on the player's machines without a central server. It has grown since, but the focus has remained on low-latency and log(N) state consensus (unlike a blockchain).
It's wrapped up as a single fetch() method, mostly mirroring the browser's native fetch(). There's a lot more I could say; I love working on it and discovering elegant solutions to the problems that pop up. I'm hoping to release a prototype in a few weeks/months. If you're interested in trying it out, let me know (joel at scaffold.io); I'd love to have some other eyes on it.
> The idea came out of me wondering a few years ago why a multiplayer game couldn't simply be run on the player's machines without a central server.
That's how they used to work! Some used peer-to-peer networking, others had one of the players host. Some still let you do this but don't always have networking that "just works".
Yes! That's a great model that works well for trusted participants - I'm attempting to build something that doesn't assume trust in any participant; i.e. empowering a node to trust a computation result from an arbitrary peer.
Sounds like a cool project! Do you have any specific use cases in mind for types of games this would be beneficial for? IMO in most cases having one player be the host is good enough. Maybe competitive games where you want to ensure the host doesn't cheat?
Thank you! My initial impetus was a MMO open-world sandbox game where players could leave/join at will. I was also interested in networking being directly p2p, as opposed to having a server intermediary. The tricky part is maintaining distributed consensus on a shared global state under those conditions, but it's a useful primitive and generalizes to a lot of other applications other than games like forums, social networks, data feeds/pipelines, maybe even chat/messengers (just my hypotheses at this point). It fits well in cases where much of the state is public and shared, as opposed to private data that's more difficult to achieve consensus on its validity.
There's a couple of ways to keep state around but they all come down to who pays the incentive to ensure a block remains available. In the same way as posting verification collateral, a node would accept a liveness incentive and post liveness collateral, then they'd be responsible for serving the data for a period of time or until new state is created.
Who incentivizes the data availability is more of an application-layer question; in this case it could be the game publisher itself or maybe a consortium of players. I've tried to build these options as much as possible into the contract layer as opposed to the scaffold protocol itself.
After my experience in consulting museums, I found that they spend a lot of money on software, which could potentially be replaced with open source software. Therefore I started an awesome list with FOSS software for museums: https://github.com/smartcompanion-app/awesome-open-source-mu....
I recently became a dad, and right now the only way my 30-day-old will sleep is with the sound of our kitchen range hood, so I built a small one pager that mimics white noise, womb sounds and our range hood. I hope I don't jinx this but works good so far.
awesome, your notes and music theory apps are very close to two of my hobby projects as well, the main difference is that my music app is guitar-centric
unfortunately, I did not have the time to pursue them. good luck to you!
Con Edison keeps getting so stupidly expensive that I decided to use my backyard for reasons other than generating weeds that I have to pay someone to remove, and instead decided to set up an off grid solar in my backyard. I bought an Aferiy P310, learned how to use a few tools to drill some holes in my bricks, and set up a bunch of Home Assistant automations, and now my basement and living room is powered by nuclear fusion with an eight minute delivery time.
Of course, now that I'm babysitting a Home Assistant instance, I felt like I should use it; Google is completely and totally incompetent with any of the "smart" devices, to a point where I swore an oath in blood that I will not buy anything Google Home or Nest related ever again. I've been replacing my awful Nest lock and awful Google thermostat with Matter-compatible stuff to work with Home Assistant.
I have been having Claude port an old game to WASM. I'm sadly not quite yet at liberty to discuss the intimate details on it (since it is not my game), though hopefully that will change soon.
Unlike a few other things I've automatically gotten ported to WASM [1] [2], this one has proven to be a lot more difficult and required a bit more active labor on my end. It was written using a strange combination of C++ and Java, with some JNI glue written in a way that neither I nor Claude are very familiar with.
It's been pretty fun figuring out how to get CheerpJ and Emscripten playing together, and it's been fun to actually write code and still be a little smarter than AI at it.
Continue work on my map-based WW2 Pacific submarine sim Silent Shark https://silentshark.app - I just added lifeguarding missions and am going to do my first ever "developer broadcast" on Steam tonight for the Steam Next Fest and hoping I don't screw things up...
I've been pleasantly surprised at the community beginning to get excited about the game.
When I was working at amazon (left May 8) working on agents was all the rage. Combined with initiatives that set goals for nearly all services to have a MCP built and available by the end of the year agents will be even more emphasized in the future.
However what happens when you actually build and launch your agent is customers try it, do some initial runs and then go ask your manager to automate their use case. That is why I have been building https://toolscaled.com/ The goal being work through your problem space using agentic chat (like Claude Desktop) and then at the end convert it to a workflow. I am pretty close to launching and have been testing. If you're interested send me an email! (if you do sign up just fyi its still in beta so YMMV.
I built a workflow execution engine that dispatches to my tool service. I had previously looked into using Temporal but at the time decided to focus on what differentiated the idea. Maybe in the future execution durability will be important enough to make using Temporal the right solution however as of now I am focused on explore the problem space using chat -> convert the good parts to a repeatable process -> trigger appropriately.
Hi HN, I am making progress working on Circuitscript, a language based on python to describe electronic schematics: https://circuitscript.net/. A basic IDE (called the Bench) to try Circuitscript is available online: https://bench.circuitscript.net/
In the last month, I have added support for more ERC rules (pin type compatibility checks), added initial support for net classes and also cleaned up the language a little (backslash line continuation, similar to python).
Recently, I just completed a 161-LED charlieplexed array design that uses nested for-loops to simplify the array design. It is currently in production and I plan to write a blog post soon to document this design.
As always, the motivation for creating Circuitscript is to describe schematics in terms of code rather than graphical UIs after using different CAD packages extensively (Allegro, Altium, KiCad) for work in the past. I wanted to spend more time thinking about the design itself rather than fiddling around with GUIs. With code, the design intentions become explicit and reviewable.
Feedback welcome, especially from anyone else frustrated with graphical schematic tools! If you have a KiCad design that you would like to convert to Circuitscript, please reach out to me as well and I will help you to do so as I am trying to challenge/test the limits of Circuitscript.
Hey, I took a look at your project, I'm not someone who deals with schematics or KiCad but I'm still interested in these kind of things. I read the motivations in the docs and understood why would someone try to create a new language after looking at SKiDL, but still feels like it could've been simply a python library/package instead of having to do the work of creating a new language and having to deal with the language and interpreter/compiler. I'm sure a more object oriented approach would have made it a better experience to script schematics, specially with all the tooling Python has (such as `uv` to manage project, `ruff` to lint and format, etc). Regarding your language, just wondering why does led and supply need quotation marks but resistors and capacitors that some not only include numbers such as (10k) don't need to. It feels unnecessary to make that difference, specially for a script that tried to be simpler
Hi! Thank you for taking a look at circuitscript! Before creating circuitscript, I did consider using the SKiDL package as a circuit design tool, however even though I am familiar with python, the syntax for things like connecting pins was very strange (using the += operator). Moreover many of the existing code to schematics, including SKiDL, forces the designer to give up the actual layout of the schematic itself. As a electronics designer in my day job, a well organized schematic is very important to understand the overall design. It does not only show connections, but is also a map of the system. A poorly drawn map complicates system understanding and troubleshooting.
I'm not sure how an object oriented approach would make things easier for schematic generation. The objects (components) themselves do not undergo much data interactions/manipulations. Maybe if you have some examples, this would be helpful for me to understand. As much as possible I am leaning towards a more functional approach, where inputs, data transformations and outputs are more defined.
With a new language, I could decide features that I wanted and more importantly, include more circuit specific features (branch/join/parallel statements). Of course, a python library would be able to produce the same data representation that circuitscript ultimately generates, but one aim of circuitscript is to make it much easier to do so.
The standard lib provides led, supply, res and cap as component functions (basically normal functions that return a component). For LED and supply, they take strings as parameters, this defines the led color and the name of the supply net respectively. Res and cap take a number parameter like 1k, 1u, 100n, etc. Such number expressions are very common in schematics and CAD packages, so this is a important feature to support (python equivalent of using 1e3, 1e-6, etc.).
A tool that creates sandboxes (docker, podman, orbstack, seatbelt, tart, containerd, kata, firecracker) and then sets up an agent (claude, codex, gemini, aider, opencode) inside it with max permissiveness (no annoying permission prompts).
It creates its own copy of your workdir for the agent to play in, and then you pull changes out ala git diffs or commits.
$ yoloai new mybugfix . -a # launch default sandbox in . and also attach the terminal
# Work with the agent...
$ yoloai diff mybugfix # See what it did
$ yoloai apply mybugfix # Bring out commits and/or uncommitted changes.
$ yoloai destroy mybugfix
A tide flag. As in, a mechanical device that turns a weather-vane-like flag that moves with the ebb and flow. It has to be powered by the tide, and must be able to withstand the elements. And, must look cool.
Then, I will slap an ESP32 & z-wave on it :D secretly to feed my Home Assistant. :D
Fishing yes, not surfing kayaking (things will eat you :D).
Really just so I can see these neat things. Like these little tiny crabs, maybe thumbnail size at most (Ocypodidae ?). They come out at low tide, have one claw as big as their body, they stand at their hole and wave it at each out other like "hey! check THIS claw out! No, brah, check MINE out!" and, they do this all the way till tide comes in. Or, the rays sitting on their nests and will wait to the last moment to swim away when the tide is going out. At high tide all kinds of bigger things will come in and check the local scene.
Once I have HA linked, I can start a camera record some of this. Yes, it has to be a rube goldberg machine; a digital camera powered by tide, recording kicked of by an over-complicated mechanical device that is also driven by flowing water.
Interesting project. That said, I can't help but wonder if a local tides chart plus wifi camera + timer would probably work well and be substantially faster to implement.
What?! And thus eschew all the vexation and tribulation of this labor?! Far be it from me to shirk mine obligation to fashion most futile things with great toil and hardship!
It's all vanilla Javascript, running in the browser, so you can wreck today's productivity right this minute if you like. It has multiplayer support, so I'll stand up a server in case anybody wants to jump in.
It's very niche, but I have created a course for learning Cangjie 倉頡, which is a Chinese input system based on the visual appearance of characters (not necessarily etymologically correct). The advantage of this system is you can type most characters via unique output (there are a few collisions where you need to pick) and you do not need to pick the character from a list. This is particular useful if you work with specialized texts in Chinese.
You can find the tool at https://www.cangjieworkbook.com/ and there is a free demo linked inside. It should work on desktop and mobile web browsers.
As an agency owner I kept having to manually monitor and audit how AI engines like ChatGPT, Claude and Gemini describe my clients' brands, so I ended up building a tool to do it for us. It is called https://BrandGEO.co, it runs a 2-minute audit across all 5 major AI engines and tells you exactly what to fix. It works both for brand owners checking their own brand and for agencies taking care of their clients' brands.
I'm working on an iPhone app to run iOS-native agents using both cloud and local models, powered by llama.cpp. It has access basic iOS tools such as calendar, reminders etc. but also more advanced ones like a custom JS environment running on QuickJS that can use various custom modules like an HTTP client, Git etc.
It's a project I have been working on for quite a long time and I released it on TestFlight about a week ago. It was really nice to work on something end-to-end, from creating a wrapper around llama.cpp with support for prompt caching/forking and automatic model loading and unloading based on device memory constraints, to the custom agentic harness the app runs on. I have also spent quite a lot of time on agent execution modes that I hope can enable to more easily reason about agent security regarding prompt injection attacks.
What I'm really hoping for now is to get actual feedback, to know if users end up having real use cases where the app is truly useful / interesting for them, to understand what should most urgently be improved etc.
Actually a pretty interesting idea. What problems does it solve? Who is your ICP? What language do they use to describe their problem? Try to answer those questions and put it in your LP.
Right now your LP reads like a technical doc rather than a product’s page.
Thank you! There's this tension between having what feels like a very capable technological foundation and still figuring out the best use cases, and my hope with releasing it as a TestFlight beta is to resolve it.
My starting hypothesis is power users and devs, people who want to experiment with local and cloud LLMs, build their own custom agents, and try experiences they wouldn't usually find in consumer AI mobile apps. As the app is now closer to release, I think it has reached a level where it is likely complete enough that there are some viable combinations of its features that can actually solve concrete user problems. I could see the app being used to create agents that serve as small shortcuts tailored to the users' needs, with all the flexibility it enables. A bit like a more iOS-native OpenClaw with opinionated takes on tooling and security. I personally used it to create a food tracker that has a good understanding of my daily routine and also TL;DRs of various sources (including HN) surfaced as suggestions on the home page.
I don't yet know the exact words those users would use to describe their problem, so surfacing that is part of why I'm putting it in front of testers first.
Recently started some agentic features for paid version, and this lead to a side project https://eatmydata.ai - a question-to-sql-to-dashboard builder, where data doesn't get exposed to AI (with bundled in-browser SQLite vector search, NER and many other features).
I've been learning Basque and wanted to see a visualization of how the semantics move into different grammatical structures when translating between Basque and English/Spanish.
Under the hood it's using Stanford NLP to analyze the input then that analysis is given to Claude to generate the data structure needed to visualize the translation. It's really cool and maybe my favorite of the itch-scratchers I've built for myself over the years.
(Xingolak is Basque for "ribbons," a nod to the visualizing metaphor used in the UI.)
I’ve been building a Prolog and WASM based LLM/Agent framework [0] , where reusable skills and core harness functionality is encoded in a logic programming language. Recently added a small TUI with a Borland Turbo Vision style design. My goal is to build a completely hackable harness that works well with smaller models and to further promote the combination of logic programming and LLMs.
I spend all day working on AI related stuff at my day job, but more recently I have been getting lots of questions about AI from friends and family and that ramped up when the Vancouver school board announced they were rolling out Copilot across high schools.
I put together the guide, made a few iterations and published it and now I am getting more questions than ever and it's turned into a blog too.
I'm having fun but it definitely feels like a topic that is underserved. A solid example, lots of resources for when your kid is the victim of a deepfake, but what if you as a parent know your kid is getting into trouble and escalating. Where do you go for help to make sure they don't escalate from unfriendly behavior to abusive or even criminal.
It provides digital loyalty cards for cafés (think of an electronic version of paper stamp cards). However with zero apps or customer signup, instead loyalty passes go straight into Apple and Google wallets.
It’s written in Ruby on Rails, which I’m enjoying learning. Still a bit rough around the edges, though it’s free for now so I’d be grateful for your feedback.
Interesting idea! I'm keen to try it out but adding a pass to my android account fails with 'This card is for test use only. Ask your administrator to grant you access.'. There is no contact information on the website but you can reach out through the Beanback account with the same name.
The idea is a project independent knowledge base so agents stop figuring out the same API quirks again and again and instead write down what was solved once. Agents submit via API, vote on each other's entries, anyone can read on the site.
Some thousand entries so far, mostly seeded by my own agents, dev infra stuff and so on. Some of it is real problems i hit in my own projects.
Website with solitaire/card games. There are so many sites, but all of them are either full of bugs, full of ads or both. So long time ago I've decided to write a site for myself that works really well, and then I shifted my attention to other projects.
This time - I'm so close! I probably need few more weeks to somewhat polish the game and fix the rendering quirks and I'll be ready to put it online for easy access when I'm bored lol.
I've been building a site to help someone start a small business. Think figuring out how to get a loan, what neighborhood I should build in, what permits I need, etc. I feel there is a ton of content for people wanting to start a VC funded business but not enough for small business local to your area.
Its still in the building phase but what I have currently is at:
I have been going regularly to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe and their app is always terrible. Connectivity is very spotty since the city is swarmed with way more people than usual and the older buildings can kill your signal.
So I've been working on https://fringeflypost.com/, an event tracker with maps, search and filter, scheduling, and sharing with friends that's offline first. It syncs down a locally stored sqlite database and caches assets pretty aggressively.
(You don't actually need to sign up, and you can just jump into the list of shows directly here https://fringeflypost.com/shows).
Looks excellent and the offline caching likely very useful for those in a rush when they turn up at the wrong venue and need to hot foot it elsewhere. Any chance of some attribution on the map?
I'm working on a general repo shape/structure linter (language agnostic)[0] - the idea is to enforce things like directory structure, existence of various files (LICENCE, etc.), file naming patterns, jsonpath + schema over json/yaml/toml, absence of potentially malicious unicode. It comes with rule bundles for various languages/presets which can be combined and extended. A goal is for it to be very fast, and useable on huge monorepos. I noticed myself having to add various forms of validation/scripts when coding using AI, and decided to build a reusable, fast tool for this purpose instead of rolling validation scripts for each project.
SoberStack: a sobriety/recovery tracker built around the idea of focusing on sober days rather then streaks so it's not all or nothing. It uses a Github style contribution graph.
I am a one man shop. I am working on this - https://www.onlyev.com/
I have been on my own now for 10 years. I am taking it one day at a time. I learned that time is my important resource as i get older. I am 54 and i just take it day by day. I am only good at sales. Its a simple business. A lotta people are doing it. I live in NYC and its not cheap here.
I'm working on Totem (https://totemkb.com), a collaborative knowledge management system built entirely in Rust without any HTML or web-tech. Currently supporting Windows, MacOS, Ubuntu, and iOS (although the iOS build is currently in review).
Although the goal is to build an efficient all-in-one-workspace, I wouldn't run a company on it just yet. Right now I'm looking for early adopters who don't mind the rough edges and relatively minimal feature set.
A complete desktop app for browsing and editing your Postgres, MySQL, SQLite data, creating beautiful dashboards, and soon designing automated workflows for repeat tasks.
I've kept a devlog of the last 10 months of building DB Pro, which has been the best way to bring users to the product. I'd highly recommend folks starting a devlog if they can.
Got my first in app purchase for my first Mac app, a photoshop like image editor with layers and blend modes and a pretty retro look and feel. $8 in revenue so far! https://mojavepaint.app
KiCad web port, with real time collaboration. I've been working on it for the last ~6 months on and off, I have some help now. It's close, we're launching in a few weeks ( hopefully this one ).
It was an interesting project since there were so many unknowns, like can we really turn an offline desktop app into a collaborative one, can it be fast enough, can we port the graphics parts. It turns out you can! I have a semi-vibe coded landing page now, you can sign up to get into the alpha cohort:
https://www.pcbjam.com/
I'm working on an open source and customisable/configurable warehouse management system.
As it's open source and built with a codebase that's easy for LLM's to work with, users can download it and tailor it to their business/operational requirements, although it also has out of the box 'industry best practice processes' so you don't have to reinvent the wheel and can only focus on writing the 10% custom stuff which differentiates your business.
As all the processes are flexible, you can also do proper 'continuous improvement' with your staff - something traditional WMS products struggle with.
No link because I'm finalising it at the moment, but if you are interested please reply!
I started wearing glasses about a year ago, and I really struggled to find frames that fit well. So, I'm learning CAD so I can 3d-print my own set of frames.
My first goal is to 3d-print frames for reading glasses that I can wear in bed while I read. This way, if I fall asleep with them on and break them, I can just print new frames and pop the lenses in.
Still working on my programming language which makes your game multiplayer automatically. Currently working on improving the tutorials. When writing the tutorials I followed the "focus on the action" principle from Diataxis (https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/) perhaps too much. Easel is a unique language in a number of ways and it really does actually have to be taught, so I'm trying to make it do a better job of that.
I’m working on
https://creditcardchecklist.com
It lets you keep track of your credit cards and which perks you have used and when the annual fee is going to hit. I often forget to use up the perk before it expires. You don’t even need an account buts you get notified if you make one. Also it’s free!
I also am working on https://trypixie.com - a way to employee your kids legally. It gets money into their Roth and saves you taxable income all while teaching them about working.
Got tired of sitting through ads to play puzzle games (my favorites are Killer Sudoku and Calcudoku), so I built my own site to play them on. I'm trying to get a huge collection of a variety of games all with a clean, mobile-friendly UI, keyboard shortcuts for desktop, leaderboards, and achievements. I'm still making tweaks and improvements as well as adding more puzzle games over time (up to 9 right now!)
Each week, everyone emails in a few photos and a sentence or two, and Dearest sends the group a private Sunday digest with everyone’s updates. The catch is, you only receive the digest if you contribute that week.
It is meant for families, old friends, grandparents, siblings, or any small group that wants to stay close without another app or endless notifications.
It’s my way to be social and know what’s going on in my friends lives without social media.
So far I only have my friends using it but I love it.
> The catch is, you only receive the digest if you contribute that week.
I love the idea, but is there a risk that folks would drop off one by one and over time forget that the thing existed?
As someone who'd be at risk of forgetting, I'd find it nice to be periodically reminded about such a digest. Maybe get an abridged version once in a while or something like that.
It’s only been out for two weeks. You do get reminders that you are going to miss this weeks digest or that others have submitted etc. but your idea is great!
Contributor for an open source scraper -- https://alltheplaces.xyz/ -- which currently has about 4700 scrapers extracting 40-someting million points of interest.
The project aims to scrape location data and other general information about shops (main use case), postal addresses, restaurants, schools, weather stations, marine buoys, traffic cameras, street trees, whatever someone may decide is worthwhile to add to OpenStreetMap, or use as location data in other projects.
There's a decent community of contributors keeping the scrapers maintained and further expanding the number of points of interest which are extracted.
The opportunity I'd like to work more on (time permitting) is the data scraped by this project I feel is heavily underutilised in other open source/community projects. For example, there's a great opportunity to generate a location map once a week of current locations of international restaurant chains, and upload to Wikimedia Commons where every language Wikipedia would gain a high quality infographic of current locations of a chain's restaurants, etc. As an additional example, time-series data from ATP could be used to update a graph hosted on Wikimedia Commons each week where the graph plots the rise and fall of retail or restaurant chains.
In the current climate, I've decided to explore building games, so I'm building a management game about turning chaotic fields of research into fundable products, fitting for Hacker News I think ;)
The concept was, what if Theme Hospital was about Victorian-esq research institution instead of a hospital? You hire strange scientists, have them explore dangerous fields of research, collect messy findings, turn them into theories, prototypes and eventually products, all the while trying to convince investors they're worth funding before they hit the market and work out what they might actually be worth
The gameloop is broken down into two parts, Exploration / Discovery and Exhibition, the closest comparison I have for the first part is take Kerbal Space Program, but focus it on Mission Control rather than the astronauts
While the mad scientists are going into weird, unstable research domains, the player is managing the institution around them, funding, equipment, research direction, safety
On the other side as you discover interesting things or successfully develop prototypes worth showing off, have investors show up and see what excites them, will they give you more funding? Push a grant your way? How are you going to keep this circus going?
You're balancing two plates, you need to invent tools to delve deeper and if you don't keep finding exciting new discoveries, your investors will slowly get bored of you
* Users are given a prompt and have 2 minutes to answer.
* Speeches are reviewed by AI and other users.
Speaking eloquently "off the dome" is an incredibly useful skill, improving all your interactions with other people. And like a muscle, you can train it with dedicated practice until it becomes effortless.
It has been very fulfilling to listen to other people's speeches, knowing that we're helping each other pursue our shared goal of becoming excellent communicators.
If you're looking to improve your public speaking, I recommend you give it a try!
I've continued working on Eidetica, my decentralized database project. I recently added support for a client/server architecture so that it can be transparently run as a local daemon for background sync and sharing the local storage with multiple users. I've been making progress on integrating blob storage next, as well as scoping out WASM based "lenses" for handling decentralized version/schema updates. https://github.com/arcuru/eidetica
I've primarily been testing it by building out my AI tool chaz into an Eidetica-native AI Agent framework for decentralized Agent sessions. It's working surprisingly well, it maps pretty well onto the storage model and it's uncovering issues with Eidetica I need to fix (which was always my primary reason for building it anyways). https://github.com/arcuru/chaz
Separately I'm building OptiMap, a SIMD-accelerated hashmap repo that explores the design space for hashmaps and benchmarks different approaches. This is mostly for my own learning but I'll eventually turn into a blog post. https://github.com/arcuru/optimap
I’m working on a web app called Pitch coach. It has vocal exercises and shows you in real time whether you are flat or sharp. Everything is saved in browser so there’s no account creation. Coolest part is that you can upload a song and it will split the vocals, recognize all the vocal pitches and then you can sing along. Crazy how much you can do in the browser these days! https://pitch-coach.pages.dev
I had a good laugh, I can't sing. Stuck on Get ready. Was there something that was supposed to happen after that?
Anyway, play/pause button is too high up, I was looking for it at the bottom of the screen. I like the UI.
This is very fun. Having just tried it with my maybe tone deaf partner, she showed progress when she sang at the same time as the notes. It might be good if there was like a faster looped version where the notes would play more frequently.
I'm continuing to expand my own deep learning library [1] built with numpy-primitives to support LLM post-training techniques like supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning with GRPO. It's a good learning experience to work without all the high-level abstractions to "build a wheel" and "use that wheel to build a car".
I'm also looking into coding harness self-improvement [2]. An inner LLM (raw LLM request) + harness solves coding tasks, an outer agent like Claude or Codex that proposes harness changes. I experimented with many things in the past few months that made me realize this self-improvement thing that everyone is talking about is just an experiment design problem. I wrote about it here [3]. I'm continuing to improve the infra around the self-improvement loop, to increase signal-to-noise ratio per experiment. I'm also generalizing the infra to expand beyond terminal bench tasks and to collect some data across different models (harness-bound vs model-bound).
https://github.com/tweibley/rubyrlm - MVP Ruby implementation of Recursive Language Models (RLMs) that uses Gemini as the model backend and a Ruby REPL for iterative reasoning.
https://github.com/tweibley/legate - Framework for building AI agents in Ruby with dynamic tool selection, multi-step planning, and session management
https://insightclips.com - Create personalized event videos (with optional CTA) — from first promo to final recap automatically.
That Ruby project looks interesting. (They all do). But what do you plan to use it on? I ask because I’ve wondered if a language like Ruby or elixir create a unique scaffold for models to use as a scratchpad or calculator the same way we do. Dynamic languages that can interact with their run time are the best medium I suspect.
I started writing a software triangle rasterizer. Not sure exactly why, but I just felt like doing it.
Like many software rasterizer projects I used Fabian Giesen's software rasterizer blog series [0] as the baseline.
For solid color triangles with depth testing my 10+ year old laptop achieve ~3.2 Gpixels/s fill rate, which is above 80% of the available memory bandwidth (~26 GiB/s at 64 bits per pixel), using memset as the baseline comparison.
I used Rust and std::simd. The code can be compiled for SSE2, NEON, AVX2 or AVX512 by changing compiler parameters. The inner loop uses 16-wide vectors (512 bits) although my computer only has 8-wide AVX2, but the compiler deals with that. I used generics so I can change vector width easily and have multiple vector widths in the same binary for benchmarking. 16-wide is about 10-20% faster than 8-wide. I was excited to see that AVX masked store instructions get used even though I did not explicitly write masked stores in the code. I spent a lot of time reading the disassembly of the generated code and it's very tight.
The performance falls off a cliff (170 Mpixels/s) once I introduce a "shader" in the inner loop because it is not SIMD friendly (one pixel at a time, not 16 pixels). But that is fine, I am intending to use this with visibility buffer style rendering (store integer triangle id's in color buffer) and/or software occlusion culling (depth buffer only). Neither technique need anything more than solid colors and z-buffer.
Helping my wife ship https://quantral.com - a platform to monitor X and Reddit for financial chatter and score companies and authors. We discovered lots of stocks early in this AI cycle from X. There’s lots of noise, so we built a platform to more easily monitor the social sentiment for our investment purposes, but now we are trying to spin out a fully fledged consumer product.
Fair point. We are working on releasing this in the App Store where there won’t be a need to enter credit card details - billing will go through Apple and cancelling subscriptions is easier. Happy to provide a promo code for a one month free trial without a card if you email us at hello@quantral.com.
- https://www.ironvolume.com/ for generating crossfit, hyrox and athx workouts and warm ups, with a few posts on topics I've found really helpful to train around.
- https://pokerchallenges.com/ for practicing the maths behind different aspects of playing texas hold'em poker, trialling it at the moment so can give anyone a free membership if they want to get to grips with it
- https://github.com/TAJD/cofferdam a tool to help with implementing code architecture compile time checks, helps give agents relevant context on how well their code fits in with the wider codebase without them having to read it all
Tried daily puzzles on pokerchallenges.com ; 2nd one is "jam or fold" 5bb deep, from the big blind. But no information on what other players do, and we are last to act on this spot, so the question doesn't make sense.
Edit : another one didn't make sense, it asked for my equity with A5o on KK7 or something, but I have no information on opponent's hand or range or betting pattern. Apparently it assumed villain had any2, but pretty much nobody has any 2 here.
I'd be happy to try some more, I used to play this seriously (even studying with solvers) and I also know and trust a couple of pros, will share with them as well.
I'm working on an OpenSource operating system, it's been 6 months now, the system runs on aarch64 and amd64 in graphical mode, it has separate kernel and userland (loaded via elf), and a proprietary api on here in turn I'm rebuilding a libc and posix compatibility, I've already brought some applications between here a shell, a 3d demo, a text editor (kilo), and doom, I'm currently working on sandboxing, on moving drivers to userland services and to disconnect when I get exhausted on the compositor (I just introduced support for multiple resolutions, themes and variable styles), actually I hope that more people will get passionate and become part of this project that I hope will not be just mine: https://github.com/olmox001/NexsOS1
I'm still working on a self-hosted search service called Hister with the goal to reduce dependence on online search engines.
Hister is a full text indexer for websites and local files which automatically saves all the visited pages rendered by your browser. It provides offline result previews, a flexible web (and terminal) search interface & query language to explore saved content with ease or quickly fall back to traditional search engines.
I've been using it for a few months and as my local index is growing I can avoid opening google/duckduckgo/kagi - and even websites listed in results - more and more frequently.
The initial reception is overwhelmingly positive with already more than 30 contributors and hundreds of contributions - perhaps you can find it useful as well. (Or at least have some constructive criticism =])
tsz is my main side project. Trying to learn from this for how to make software in fully automated fashion. tsz's goal is to match tsc (tsgo) but perform better. I am not passing all tsc's own test cases and working towards making it work on complex type packages.
I am on the last miles before releasing a public version of an adaptation engine for cohenhallowell.com.
Essentially, its a platform that takes in any study or learning material (epub, images, audio, lecture notes, etc) and it uses a series of AI models to create multimodal and interactive learning experiences adapted for 7 types of neurodivergent learners (adhd, dyslexia, asd, dysgraphia, etc..)
I'm building MyLLM, a (another) private AI assistant for iPhone, it runs models on-device (llama.cpp + Metal) or against your own server, so nothing leaves your phone.
The fun part lately has been MyLLMos: the assistant builds HTML/Python apps on the fly, and you keep the ones you like in a gallery to re-run. It's slowly becoming a home screen for things your AI made for you. There's also an app marketplace, it's all free and open, HTML5 based, can be edited in the app or you can get the like of 'Fable' to generate an advance code and the app will happily store it and run it on your iPhone.
A folding python code plugin for neovim. It allows me to check faster what a file is doing by only looking at the function signatures and the first docstring line. Then open the docstring completely.
I use tab and shift-tab to fold or unfold.
https://codeberg.org/gixita/nvim_python_fold
I went on sabbatical to fulfill my dream project - consolidating 30 years of training logs that span everything from paper and Excel spreadsheets to various fitness services and devices I used. I'm enjoying the technical challenges involved - digitizing paper hand written logs using OCR / visual generative models, navigating the maze of athletic metrics with their crazy trademarked names and SOTA multidimensional models. Having incredible fun building AI coaches: agents ranging in character from Al Pacino in Any Given Sunday to the coach from my teenage years, utilizing ICL / PFN model-based predictions, ... and more.
The best part is the rush of memories while ingesting my own history - photos and recordings I completely forgot, as well as navigating data shared by friends - records they didn't see in years because the original applications they used no longer exist or won't run on their current HW.
I’ve been playing D&D for a few years with friends, and over time we’ve built a rich world..full of contradictions because I can’t remember half of the improv I do as DM.
I built https://loracle.app to automatically build a wiki of various entities in our campaign and enable rag q&a with an ai assistant about specific world facts.
I'm a long-time user of Monica (https://github.com/monicahq/monica/) but was unhappy that not much was happening. There is Chandler which is the next-gen version of Monica, but it has taken a direction which I don't like, as it is geared more to journaling. The thing that moved me to implement something myself was that the carddav interface duplicated the contacts in my address book.
I required a tool where I can put my contacts with all their details and also map out their relationships and put those details in my phones address book.
I'm dog fooding it already for as long as it was working, and I'm delighted with it.
I am working on Baduk Teacher, which makes having Go lessons (the board game) across different languages possible. The highest level of human Go is predominantly in Korea, China, Japan and Taiwan. Western world is catching up, but the gap is still very huge.
I think the main reason is that the West has quite limited access to pro-level teachers (similar to how chess is like in Asia, just the other way round). Most pro-level Go teachers in Asia do not speak/read any foreign languages (e.g. English), so I want to remove the language barrier and make high level of Go teaching more accessible to the Western world (so that the Go population there will increase). Several European users used it and the feedback was good (and recurring purchases). The translation part is working quite well (Go-specific domain translation), and I hope it will help more foreign Go enthusiasts improve their game.
I build and maintain a fleet of microsaas products, all revolving around problems I have personally encountered at work:
https://npsbeacon.com
NPS survey and analysis tool. I built this because I needed an easy and cost effective way to manage NPS surveys and almost had a heart attack when I learned what some of the competitors are charging.
https://contributoriq.com/
Helps tremendously with the M&A process during due diligence when you need to quickly understand who are the SMEs in specific parts of code base.
https://dependencydesk.com
Another M&A tool. Useful for software company sellers who are required to disclose details related to software IP ownership such as what third-party dependencies are used in their software.
https://securitybot.dev
All-in-one security, uptime, and SEO monitoring tool. I love working on this, and it has been so useful helping to identify various issues in my other products. Simple Slack alerting integration.
https://iterops.com
Heatmap, rage click, dead click, simple A/B testing tool. Like NPSBeacon I built IterOps because the competing solutions are charging far too much for what they offer.
https://spiesindc.com
One of these projects is not like the other lol. This is that project. Cold War history / stamp collecting subscription service. I probably lose money on this and yet will never stop running it.
My personal rule is to only build side projects that I plan on using all the time. Otherwise I'll just lose interest and they will languish. So far, so good.
Previously I've shared optio - my project for orchestrating coding agents. It ties into ticketing systems and when assigned a ticket, it launches a coding agent in k8s and works until the PR is ready, resuming for failed CI or PR feedback (https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47520220).
Recently I've been trying to expand it from just coding focused to any kind of agent workflow. So now there are cron and webhook triggers, and more general agent tasks that aren't necessarily coding focused (https://github.com/jonwiggins/optio/blob/main/docs/persisten...).
I think next I want to try and add features for long term memory for agents, but haven't decided on a good way to do it.
You could have a dedicated lightweight-agent running a cheap model in parallel to any workload, analysing the workload (like the prompt) and creating "memories" in a vector DB. These could be according to some guidelines. Alternatively, if there's safety risk - storing and approving could be decoupled and split into 2.
I’m working on small agent harness at home for a personal assistant. In spirit it’s similar to OpenClaw or Hermes Agent but I’m mostly using it for learning about agent harnesses to get a better understanding of the ecosystem.
Overall it’s been a fun learning experience and I’m looking forward to some more of the hardware work I’ll need to jump into soon. I really want to get a more focused kitchen / cooking oriented voice assistant working. So far I have a few simple voice-to-timer settings done e.g. “set a 10 minute timer for the pasta” that tells me “ding! Pasta timer” when it goes off. You can set as many concurrent timers as you need with different names.
I need some better hardware before I try using the pi for full hands free while cooking. I’ve mostly been using a webapp on my phone but afaik you can’t easily wake word a phone on a web app without some real hacking.
Overall the projects been enjoyable, once you understand the basics of a harness it feels like there’s a lot of problems you can throw them at.
i'm working on something similar, not a full agent harness but an agentic workflow app so i can learn too. if you're interested in sharing it would be awesome to take a look. i can share my project too!
I'm working on rookery, "A PGP-first, self-hostable email server that comes with a web mail client and modern standards out-of-the-box.": https://github.com/oleblaesing/rookery
If you are a privacy minded person like me, you got only a few options when it comes to email with some ease of use: ProtonMail, Tuta etc. Rather than becoming a new competitor to those, I want to give the power of the decentralized email standard back into the users hand. Everyone with a bit of self-hosting/Linux knowledge, can setup their instances for themselves and their friends/family/business.
Bootstrapped that heavy via vibe coding. Used it to learn a lot about the email standard and related technology. However, I find it too valuable to just be a learning project. Now I'm cleaning it up to get in control again and to proof its secureness by rewriting/restructuring/refactoring line by line.
Protonmail (and I guess all others including Gmail, except Fastmail) has a nasty feature, where the sender can put an expiration date on emails and practically get a confirmation you received the email without you ever knowing you received the email.
If the expiration is for example one day, you might never see it.
To my knowledge, Protonmail does not even show information that the email has expiration. Nor can you access log of deletions.
This feature was used against me on a court trial.
Sounds great, share it if you want - using rspamd right now, don't think it's worth the switch at the moment though, as I just want to stabilize/deslopify everything first, before iterating on individual aspects.
My mother had a stroke a little over a month ago and I don’t live close by. I went in search of a wellness product that would let me know how she’s doing without her feeling I’m prying too much. I didn’t find one, so now I’m trying to build it. I’m also working on moving closer.
Have you looked at Home Assistant (HA) as your consolidating platform?
I helped set up one in a nursery home with mmWave motion, temp, humidity, switches, electricity flow, etc. If they want to, they can control water faucets, sinks, flushing WC, ceiling fans, heat/cool, plugs and switches.
The beauty is that you just need to find a device with either existing comms "protocol" (e.g., RESTful APIs, MQTT, Zigbee, Z-Wave, BT, BLE, Metter, Wi-Fi) that HA understands, or get one of the many community solutions for others (e.g., LoRaWA, 433MHz, modbus).
Hi, I’m working on Trophikos, a recipe organization app for iOS. Not a meal planner, not a social feed. Just a calm, well-designed place to collect your own recipes, food, baked goods, and even native support for cocktails. Manual entry, OCR importing, URL importing, and the ability to share and export.
I’m still actively working on it but just submitted to App Store review. TestFlight is open if anyone wants to try it before launch: https://testflight.apple.com/join/baWAQ4tj
Happy to hear any feedback, especially from people who currently store recipes across Notes, screenshots, and 15 open browser tabs.
This is awesome - I tried building something similar that my wife and I use. Do you support import from instagram? IMO that's what a lot of friends want give how much of cooking / recipe content is out there (and Instagram's search is atrocious)
Thank you! I haven’t implemented support for importing from IG, would you drop a couple of links and I’ll take a look and see! Searching on meta anything is so bad.
Im continuing my work on my apps but ive decided to focus extra on these two the past month and will focus on it more in this month.
1. https://myvisualroutine.com which i just also recently launched on Android after an extensive testing period. Its so great to hear from parents who find my app useful for them and their family, thats what its all about!
2. https://stao.app i recently added some simple workouts between positions just to get some stretches in, i found it really helpful and ive gotten great feedback from my users
3. Besides those, i have other apps in https://tskulbru.dev/portfolio/ which i will rotate to probably in july and try and expand them more.
About a year ago, I started working on disassembling the NES game Faxanadu. The goal was to fully understand and document the game, and to produce the most thorough understanding of the game yet. It's been fascinating. The game has a two binary scripting languages (one for interactions with items and NPCs, one for NPC/enemy behaviors) and a very interesting graphics rendering layer. At this point pretty much the entire game is well-understood.
Based on this work, there's now a new suite of tools for producing games under the Faxanadu engine, new major mods built with all this, and some work on a modified ROM better built for porting and modding.
Building a universal web-based retro game modding tool along with that work called Nostalgia Studio. The idea is that there's a core foundation for representing game state and building editors, a platform-specific layer for representing things like the NES APU and PPU state, and then game-specific implementations that populate state for two layers below.
Those are the hobbies.
Day job, I work on Review Board (https://www.reviewboard.org), one of the original code review products. We just released Review Board 8, which was a pretty large project (we built Office document review, browser-native spell checking in CodeMirror, a new interdiff filtering algorithm, Forgejo integration, and a bunch of other things).
So now I'm working on plans for Review Board 9, with a goal of releasing within the next 4-6 months. Got some thoughts on how the review process can be rethought for this current era of development, so starting work on that.
I built a news aggregator that pulls in hundreds of RSS feeds and uses multiple large language models to synthesize daily briefs. There's also Tech and Finance editions, plus local editions for some US locales. https://feedpunk.com
I'm also building a modern HTTPS-only transport utility called curb. It's an alternative to curl and wget. It's written in Go using only the standard library. curb can stream output or download files and picks the right behavior based on what the server returns and whether the output is going to a human or a pipe. It also has a '--vet' mode that runs the body through security sieves; this is meant to add some protection and friction for the 'curl | sh' use-case. https://gocurb.dev
A jobs board for urbanists. I run the newsletter https://urbanismnow.com and our jobs links are some of the most popular and we also get more jobs than we can put each week in the newsletter. So thought I'd spin it out into something a little separate. I've been noodling on it for a while but I think we're about ready to launch.
I've also recently setup Hermes to be a bit of a project manager for my side projects and it's worked quite well. Gave it a little CLI to see my todos, projects, and "areas" (ongoing long term things). Then it bugs me once in a while when a project is going stale. One of the nicest things is being able to add stuff to the past so if I did work on something but it wasn't associated with a todo I just let it know and then it'll backdate that.
No, but I have a very strong interest in it. I also built a real estate search platform that put public transit and biking first and it achieved a little bit of success in Ireland (not a place with great transit or biking) before I finally had to stop investing time into it.
I’m working on Peak Flow Meter Diary, a simple app to help people with asthma record peak flow readings more easily, then combine those records with environmental data to provide earlier warnings about possible triggers.
In the UK alone, around 7.2 million people have asthma. Globally, WHO estimates that asthma affected 363 million people in 2023 and caused 442,000 deaths.
Peak Flow Meter Diary is not meant to detect every possible trigger. It will not warn you if someone suddenly sprays perfume nearby, or if a dusty bag is opened in the same room. But it could help with risks that can realistically be monitored ahead of time, such as weather, pollen, pollution, cold air, storms, and similar factors.
The aim is to make daily tracking easier, show simple visual warnings and notifications, and make it easier to share useful records with clinicians.
I’m also trying to build it in a way that reduces paper, plastic, and electronic waste. If funding allows, I would like to make the project carbon-negative.
That is the bigger dream: to make a small example of how even modest start-up can think about environmental impact from the start, and use it as a practical showcase.
Feedback welcome, especially from anyone with asthma, clinicians, carers, or people who have worked on health tracking tools. By now I know that my kickstarter is not going anywhere, so I would value any input was the idea that bad, or lack of marketing and accessing appropriate groups etc. I think this community has a lot of experience so I would like someone to share what could have I done better. Do not be shy to tell me if you think idea was waste of time.
AI code reviews grounded in 12 classic engineering books — decay risk diagnostics with book citations, severity labels, and 6 analysis modes including full-sweep auto-fix.
https://github.com/hyhmrright/brooks-lint
I love this. I’d like to incorporate this into my agentic IDE (www.propelcode.app). Id be happy to give you the revenue from the code reviews to support your project.
Thanks! Feel free to follow my "skill" repository and my other repositories. If you spot any issues, please submit an issue—let's work together to improve the projects.
1. been using sudoku.com's app for a while and have some reservations with it, and a few new ideas that i wanted to try, so building a new sodoku app. this is in its earliest stages. Have a prototype to test ideas i want to build in.
3. Almost finalized the first episode of my labor economics youtube channel, hand animated by a team of amazing artists. Looking to build it into a sustaining channel.
4. Building a server-driven UI framework at work with Go and OpenAPI on server side, swift and kotlin on client side.
Currently I am working on a browser + server based video editing site. The site is almost 6 years old and started as something I made for friends on Discord. It's a tool based site where I add tools as friends and family request them, most tools like resizing a video, cutting a video, extracting audio use ffmpeg wasm and run in the browser but I also have the option to process it on my server which is faster. In the last couple of months I have started experimenting with AI and I have added some AI tools such as transcription, image generation with small models and stuff like that. I am also dogfooding the website for my $dayjob so I added a browser based screen recorder which allows me to create short tutorial like videos and quickly share them with clients.
https://editclips.online/
Agent harness for durable workflows, starting with Temporal.
Most agents for durable workflows feel like toy examples. There is no "Codex" or "Claude Code" for, say, Temporal. So I'm building full-featured agent for these runtimes. Why? Because it makes long-running agents easier to operate and scale. Currently, all frontier harnesses need to run inside a guest OS and need a dedicated process, this is quite challenging to orchestrate and maintain.
To make it work, I had to figure out what part to run as deterministic workflow code, and what part to run as I/O or side effects (aka activities). I'm using a CAS for most of the payloads to maintain a lightweight footprint in the workflow code.
Currently supporting skills, MCP, prompts, a virtual file systems, and soon sandboxes.
I'm maintaining a public dashboard that monitors the occupancy of public parking garages in my city (https://www.parkeergaragesdelft.nl). Last year the city council requested this information from the municipality but it's still not delivered. I just finished a redesign that includes references to the relevant city council discussions that aren't settled due to missing data.
Another project is https://www.beeldplek.nl, a timelapse platform powered by community photos. The idea is to place a mount and QR code at fixed viewpoints around the neighbourhood. People scan, photograph the view, optionally add their name, and submit. The infrastructure is up and running but getting the permit to place the mount has been a slow process so far.
Long time ago I got tired of all the worthwhile weightlifting apps wanting a monthly payment for full feature set while delivering an uninspiring, cross-platform experience.
Out of my love for weightlifting and iOS native apps I began building Plates as a one-time purchase for the full, premium experience. Completely native with SwiftUI and some UIKit. It has been half a year since I first released it and still going strong. Adding more and more features I myself find worthwhile as time goes on.
Not so far — I'm focusing on building the best iOS experience I can, but if it keeps growing the way it has I could absolutely see it somewhere down the road.
I broke my wrist a month ago which prompted me to follow through on thoughts I'd been having for about 6 months about switching to a split ergonomic keyboard (I landed on the Kinesis 360 Pro) and a different keyboard layout (Colemak-DH) to help with RSI I get while programming.
I've got a little bit of mobility back in my wrist now (enough to type on a standard layout keyboard), so I gave the new split keyboard a try, and the switch was less than smooth to say the least. I looked online for different resources to learn mainly just the Colemak layout, and while each had their strengths, they didn't all do what I wanted.
To that end, and because I don't have the time or wrist at the moment, I vibe coded a desktop program that merges aspects of MonkeyType, Keyzen-Colemak and Colemak Academy. Mainly to give myself a tool to learn with, but also to see how useful vibe coding something from scratch like this is. So far I've been impressed with how far it got on the first go. Only a few times have I needed to guide it to fix behaviors, but most of my time has been spent extending the program in ways that make it more useful to me.
Once I've got the ability to, I might consider giving a rewrite of this tool a go by my own hands. I haven't looked at the code it's produced, but I'm sure there will be aspects of it that I would prefer be done differently.
Working on it has been a joy as ad-blocking tech touches so many aspects of software engineering - from systems and security to the intricacies of JS environments in browsers.
Benefits-wise, system-wide filtering disables ads and tracking not just in browsers, but desktop apps as well (which you'll be amazed how much they do). It's especially relevant now as Google is re-activating their efforts to hinder ad-blockers by killing Manifest V2 in Chrome. So much of tech is actively bleeding cash on AI right now, which means the efforts to screw over users will only accelerate. This makes something that sits at the network level indispensable imo.
We are in the process of writing our own vertical stack with Go to control the machine instead of expensive and handicapped solutions from Siemens and etc.
I thought that applying AI on 1v1 competitive pokemon would be a fun and educational experience on POMDPs and trying out reward free models on a problem that would be classically treated as a RL problem. This was only possible thanks to a lot of foundational work from the open-source community and last year's competitive pokemon NeurIPS track https://pokeagent.github.io/track1.html - they laid out the plugins to connect policy models to pokemon showdown for live play and evaluation.
I have already finished training the standard discriminative auto-regressive architectures by imitation learning on player actions, compared it with previous baselines set in the study. I want to match or exceed the best prior model Kakuna @ 142M params, but in a limited budget. JEPA style world models are showing promise when conditioned on actions [1] and frontier research on JEPA with trajectory straightening [2] shows that improved planning is natural outcome of improved representations.
If any good research ideas come out of this exploration then even better!
For a while now I've been working on an open source haptics engine for Gran Turismo 7 that also does some pit radio feedback as well. It currently outputs a bass shaker audio signal for chassis bump, engine vibration (loosely based on engine geometry) and gear change events. I also have wind simulation in the works as well.
I didn't want to run a Windows host for any of the existing solutions so have targeted the Raspberry Pi Zero 2 however the app does compile to Linux, MacOS and Windows so it can run on anything. For the wind simulation I'm playing with an ESP32 based PWM controller which connects over Bluetooth using a custom GATT profile.
I've mentioned it here and there online but have yet to see anyone actually use it other than myself.
My 8 year old son has pretty poor handwriting which is affecting his exams. I bought him handwriting notebooks to practice but I could not really point where / what to improve ("try harder" / "make it neater" didn't help :) )
Out of curiosity, I tried using AI for help by scanning the paper and the feedback for improvement was quite good (definitely better than mine). So I created an Android app for this (no iphone for now): you write on paper, take a picture and get feedback on what to improve
I made a simple wee Konbini compass* app for whenever I'm ambling around Tokyo so I no longer have to go through the (_so heavy_) process of opening a map app, changing to jp keyboard and typing `konbini` to reliably find something.
Instead it's just a compass face, with brand and distance.
It's free for basic konbini hunting (has probably most of the stored in Japan), and is offline first. So maybe it's useful to other folk?? (I hope so!)
There's some stamp-book style collection things in there too, but that's more fun, and a few `PRO` gated things (more stats, filtering... soon some other store types). But none of it required for finding the next Biru or coffee.
I'm really interested in gamedev tooling and I'm working on a tool called PixelAid[0] right now. A lot of people are essentially discovering AI image gen as a way to make art for games, but AI is especially bad at pixel art right now. Color palettes, grid sizes, animation drift are some really big issues that basically make those things unusable. I wanted to take a non-AI approach to fix these things with some good ol' math and tools.
I'm trying to build more things around AI pixel art - honestly, I think it's crazy some people out there are charging money for things like this and seeing where I can help (and also just learn more about this stuff myself).
Look up Sprite Fusion as well - it's a very good tool for grid-snapping / palette reduction / etc. and was specifically developed with cleaning up AI assets.
The Ubuntu DDoS last month inspired to me make a better apt cache service. It's looking like I'll be cutting a 1.0 release later this week (after extensive testing in my environment).
The primary features I'm focusing on are: It can serve packages if the upstream is unavailable or corrupt, it is reliable.
It snapshots and verifies the cache, and then only updates the snapshot when: a new metadata is available, it has downloaded updated packages that you commonly request, all the metadata checks out.
It's been running in my environment with ~200 clients, ~50 of them get reinstalled every day and then do a full set of package updates and installs. Been working great, even when I shut down Internet access while doing it.
Crossed over 100K MRR and I'm shooting for 2M ARR by the end of the year. Growing something in this stage is totally different from making it go from zero to one so it's an interesting learning curve. AI has also changed the calculus as well where it seems less crazy to try and do this sort of thing. Time will tell!
The basic idea is to make Regex-scans so fast/cheap that "a metric" can be anything numeric in the text and "tracing" is useless because you can just log (and filter) more things. Turns out Regex at >200GB/s solves a lot of problems.
Metric cardinality explosion is immediately a non-issue, histograms have arbitrary resolution, and you can get from histogram pixels back to the underlying logs. And no need to instrument everything thrice for logs, metrics and traces.
The next big feature I'm aiming for is needle-in-a-haystack searches. The data block headers support it already, but the scan engine doesn't yet use it.
It's a side-project from our consultancy work. We're two deep technologists and so far entertaining the notion that we're very bad at (product) sales. But we're trying to learn that now.
In the last few weeks I've been working on a couple of custom data transformation and chart visualization DSLs that pair well together, as you can see here:
Full LSP that is built into the binaries and compile to CLI and WASM. Full LSP support in the Monaco text editor npm packages that use the same static analysis crate as the VS Code LSP client.
Native GIS with GeoJSON and Shapefile support for both languages.
I'm working on a dashboard for ranking llms, then finding the best local (by size) and/or hosted (by price) variants of the models. Currently have ArtificialAnalysis leaderboard for ranking, ollama registry for local models and openrouter for hosted models. https://ollamadash.up.railway.app
By default, home page gives all models in the leaderboard, local and hosted. Search for models in the search box on the home page to find the top models by ranking, local(by size) and hosted (by price).
You can also do deep querying/sorting/searching filters of models in each of these three nodes (see the other tabs on top).
The next steps I am working on (would love feedback on this or anything else):
Phase 1:
- Change clicks on home page model tiles in one column to search and show models filtered by that across Artificial Analysis, Ollama, OpenRouter
- User specifies their system VRAM (unified/dedicated) and we automatically filter the home page with models that would fit on that RAM - in the three columns.
- User specifies their price range (per MTok, max across input and output), and we similarly filter and rank by those models across all columns.
- User specifies both (VRAM and price range), and we filter by both - leaderboard is union of local and hosted, local by VRAM and hosted by price range match.
Phase 2:
Once I have this working, add a local desktop client that automatically reads user system and infers VRAM, renders app as webview. Considering pyside6 with Qt for this.
Phase 3:
On desktop client, user can download and chat with the local models automatically based on leaderboard, optionally call hosted models, etc. Used primarily to evaluate and compare local vs hosted models for user's use cases. Also have some interesting alternate experiences to host within the local private app for user to interact with llms, agents, etc.
Do let me know whether this seems useful, or how I can make it more useful.
Kudos for trying and I think it is a great start. Part of the issue is still that individual models differ greatly ( especially local ones ) in terms of what they can do ( and do well ). The problem is that you want some more custom tags ( ideally created by users who want to contribute to tag's accuracy ) 'can it generate csv', 'can it follow schema', 'can it offer position on $conversy_Z'.. none of these will be obvious, but will relate to real use cases.
We go back to the question of 'what does best actually mean'.
Thanks. Completely agree that it would be great to have more fine grained tags. How can we add such tags credibly from users without risk of them gaming the system? Maybe we can aggregate across more diverse leaderboards (lmarena,vals ai, etc. and the long tail of niche leaderboards)?
A simple way to prove that a piece of text, a post, a message, was written by me.
Yes, the burden should not lie on the author, and you could argue it's not even relevant. Still, the default has shifted and there's a refreshing feeling when you're forced to choose your own words.
This is not perfect. You can still find ways to have a machine write a text into this box. But what's guaranteed is the time: writing a message takes the time a human would actually need.
At the very least writtenhuman.com is a statement that the problem it's tackling is real. One with the potential to become a global crisis.
Sadly, this will always be a game of cat and mouse. I wonder if it was ever avoidable for the internet to become a hundred of such games at once, between advertisers and ad blockers, trackers and browsers, hackers and developers, search engines and SEO experts...
If your concept took off, someone will make a program that inputs the LLMs text like a human would. It might still take some time (if it isn't possible to hack the timing records client-side), you'd probably have to get busy detecting multiple connections from the same IP, and then they'd work around it...
this is interesting but it would be much better if this was like a native keyboard or something or a web plugin on browser that does this automatically instead of having to manually do it everytime. cool idea though but its an ask to open a different page just to write a post
The thing is no matter what you do it's always extra work. There are similar projects that provide sdk's that you can integrate. The goal for this project was to create something simple and to make it a topic.
ummm just tested, works:
<copy>A simple way to prove that a piece of text, a post, a message, was written by me.
Yes, the burden should not lie on the author, and you could argue it's not even relevant. Still, the default has shifted and there's a refreshing feeling when you're forced to choose your own words.
This is not perfect. You can still find ways to have a machine write a text into this box. But what's guaranteed is the time: writing a message takes the time a human would actually need.
At the very least writtenhuman.com is a statement that the problem it's tackling is real. One with the potential to become a global crisis.
Oh I see, yeah I'm actually experiencing the same on mobile. I'll add some trims and remove line breaks for validation. Also include the stats and reconstruct them before submission so only the text needs to be pasted. thx for the feedback!
I've always wanted a writing app built around experimentation, where you could write multiple takes on a paragraph then swap them in and out to see how each sounds in context. That, and I wanted a writing app that treated both Markdown and Rich Text as first class citizens, with side-by-side documents for notes alongside a draft, full keyboard control, and more.
It's taken forever (never reinvent the text editor, they say, and they're right) but it's finally at the point where a handful of us are using it for daily writing, and it's just about ready to launch.
> gmd indexes local markdown with full-text, vector, and hybrid search on Typesense; web search, fetch, crawl, and research; llm-wiki pattern and agents; local or cloud.
Building a gameboy speaker from scratch. Kind of like a record player or mini disc player, but using gameboy and gameboy color games. Trying my best to document the process https://www.youtube.com/shorts/MQ16pvz3xeQ
Lots of fun and novel problems to solve across hardware, software, firmware, enclosure, legality, manufacturability! It also got me collecting random carts just to hear the incredible music locked away (some samples at the end of this video https://www.youtube.com/shorts/7naKAga8hAE )
Working on Authbound. Digital identities are slowly becoming more prominent. With EU mandatory regulations, it will just boost this market. So we're building eIDAS 2.0 / EUDI Wallet Plug & Play SDK integration for businesses that don't want to figure out the compliance and technical mess themselves.
Side effect: KYC gets stupid cheap. Cryptographic credential verification vs. traditional document checks is not even close on cost (≈90% cheaper). Qualified Electronic Signatures and EUDI Wallet Payment systems are also coming in the following years.
It leverages virtual mount points to make file metadata available between Alice and Bob, and make the files appear as if locally.
So for example instead of waiting to upload then download a Blu Ray movie, or a large game, you can just add it into the virtual mountpoint and your recipient can instantly play it, or install it, and the download happens in the background with random offset jumps, and caches it locally.
Still working on my web site quality assurance software. Getting close to private beta (hopefully very soon). Back end is written in Java and built with Javalin and Jsoup and persisted to PostgreSQL. Front end is JS/React. My back end crawls the designated website and for each page runs a number of analyzers to assess the quality across the following categories: accessibility, content quality (spelling, missing spaces between words, etc), performance, security, content policy (required phrases and forbidden phrases), site integrity, and seo. Each site can be configured to have its own custom dictionary (for spell checking). It's been a lot of fun and I'm looking forward to taking the wraps off it.
One thing I have been working on is a implementation of X.509.
(I also made my own implementation of DER, which I already use for some things that are unrelated to X.509, such as a game engine, and some other stuff where a structured data format would be helpful. So, it includes some types which are not used in X.509.)
Everyone is working on personal agents but their identity model is wrong. They act as you, risk your reputation, your data and more. Nym is a personal agent that has (and can make) all of its own accounts and only gets selective read only access to yours.
The goal is to make reliable agents that are able to operate safely in the world to help you do what you want, without exposing your accounts and personal identity to potential harms.
For instance nyms have their own e-mail addresses at nym-mail.com, you can CC them on chains and they can only respond to people on that chain with a lease of 5 days, or permanently for people you specifically add.
Usually, I barely report on this thread once every few months, but this month was highly productive:
1. I changed how lists appeared in the UI to fix a very annoying pattern where users were confusing lists and things.
2. I finished adding image uploads. Now you can add and view image attachments.
This was quite a challenging task because there are a lot of security implications, and Cloudflare Workers don't support sharp. So I was implementing all the pixel bomb detection, optimizations, and other stuff by myself. Also, self hosted https://imgproxy.net came in handy as a price-efficient image processing solution.
While images are seen in List view (with a layout I'm very proud about!), gallery view is still under testing, as I'm still not completely happy with how it integrates with previous UI decisions.
3. I developed, and delivered ton of small QoL features and bugfixes. Also a few bigger features are in testing.
4. Generally, the app is close to being feature-complete for V1, so I'm slowly starting to work on marketing. It is way less entertaining than reiterating on the same for 2 years straight:(
Do you love weird clocks like I do? Check out my https://steampunkclock.com! That's weird for you - based on the spirograph concept. There are actually three clocks in there; you can get to the others directly at https://mobiusclock.com and the most useful one, https://dayspiral.com that shows your local time of sunrise and sunset, all with a 12-hour clock face. How did I cram 24 hours of info into a 12 hour clockface, you ask? I used a 2-turn spiral!
Nice work! Getting the moon info is a challenge, isn't it? My first sun clock was written in C++ in the 1990s. I decided to stick with a 12-hour clockface mainly because people are so much more familiar with them.
The concept for my Steampunk clock comes from the early 2000s. It's amazing what you can do in 3d these days in javascript!
Isn't it? The ability of the cloud-hosted intelligences we have access to is so hard to imagine. 1990s huh, and 2000's, you have a lot of experience and wisdom to share! I'm curious about some of your opinions/perspectives on topics, so I'm writing myself a note to look through your comment history and learn a bit more about you.
Thanks for sharing!
edit: OK just looked at your steam punk clock. so cool! & thank you for the kind words earlier.
I see you have a weather feature that predicts temperatures for the day. How about showing that info on the clock itself, maybe as color coding? Some ideas for other useful info that you can hang on your clock: (1) tide info indicated by a ring of varying width could be cool looking, (2) a second time zone so you can coordinate with a distant person. I did add this second time zone to my www.dayspiral.com clock, it even shows a green line where both people will be awake. (3) appointments?
yes, thank you for that! love those ideas. for your day spiral clock, hmm maybe I'm missing something, im not seeing the green line and not sure what happened with the show interface button. it stopped working after clicking it a few times.
incognito reset and I can see the tide feature now, very cool. and the side by side time comparison too.
I find myself a bit confused by the inner spiral, when the clock hand for me now is on 11am its on the inner spiral which intuitively leads me to believe its on pm, but after thinking a lot, I kinda get it. when I was making an interaction of my sun clock, I had a spiral that looked like this. to make it more "readable" and grokable, had the spiral come out a lot more so that inner spiral when the clock is at 11am would still be outside but break off right before it meets the outer spiral and just barely turn inwards. not sure if that is clear, but that helped me with readability.
TBH I delegated it to the cloud-intelligence, and it took a bit of time to get the algorithms right and once I validated it for one zip code, I scaled it for the others 3-years in advance and batched it over a few days and just uploaded a bunch of .json.gz files of the astronomically calculated data into blob storage. Didn't do much thinking besides how to boss around and order the patterns/"thinking" from the cloud-intelligence and my vision.
Tip, you can rotate and zoom the steampunk clock - try zooming in on the gears! Click the "Show interface" at lower left to see all the options or switch clocks.
I continue working on my search engine for Dungeons and Dragons, basically making a specialized chatgpt for D&D + a discord bot that autorecords sessions and sends you the transcript & AI summary when it's done.
At the moment I'm trying to figure out how to make it completely free without sinking too much of my own money into it. I'm thinking maybe running it on one GLM subscription or something like that, and it simply is not available whenever it runs out of tokens?
Launching https://leafy.you soon - a general-purpose in-browser assistant. Compiles reports, fills forms, interfaces with 900+ services you own.
More broadly, I spent ages developing a self-solving Kanban for mid-sized companies and enterprises (https://kodan.dev) - controllable autonomy level, multiplayer support, remote coding server, works on multirepo projects, mobile support, previews, and more. The pain exists, but it's pretty hard to break the integration barrier.
So I'm spinning the feature I used the most into a separate, easy-to-understand product for now.
I started working on this in my free time in 2010 or 2011, and initially used it as a project to learn databases, cloud, et cetera. I never actually set out to be a game developer!
So this is my first attempt at game design, and has its share of issues, but I'm proud of it.
I just wrapped up https://llmrender.com/, a tiny (10kb) Markdown to React renderer works with all of the Markdown + LaTeX math you'd normally expect in a normal project.
I made it because doing one of the mainstream Markdown renderers + Katex (LaTeX) + Prism.js (syntax highlight) adds 300kb of gzipped JS to the frontend projects, so with this you can have it all for just 10kb. It also works well with streaming/does stable partial rendering.
It supports features usually reserved for LLM chatbots, but also for normal everyday Markdown, so feel free to use it or give feedback!
Personal (as in, "for personal use, not a product") conversation partner -- I speak in German, one level is correcting the mistakes, allowing me to reformulate the statement, another level is responding to the intended idea. Rinse, repeat.
I've been working on a fitness app. It's been a fun project on the side for a while, initially designed to help me keep track of my weekly hours or kilometres on my watch without shipping data to a cloud somewhere. This then grew (with me, as my training and goal did) to include all the other fun things like plans, graphs, notifications, etc.
The app tries to help build good habits - Encouraging and motivating users to achieve their goals.
The client focuses on extensibility, IRCv3 compatibility, and a modern UI and UX. I am realizing that IRCv3 is capable of being built on top of though, so I may start incorporating external features outside of the protocol itself.
Some friends and I have also been building a start up a month and the latest one to come out of it is medspa software: https://spaarc.net
At one point I got really annoyed at how difficult it was to find the best supplement for the money, so I built https://suppvalue.com/
It's pretty simple: just search for the vitamin/mineral/supplement you want, and it displays them all ranked by the most amount of that supplement per dollar.
Multivitamins and Omega 3s work a little different, and protein powders are grams of protein per dollar, but that's the gist. Anyway, the affiliate link isn't even set up yet, but maybe some people could find this useful in their personal lives. Open to feedback!
I got a little annoyed (okay, more than a little) with agentic developer tools and started building a replacement that I use every day now for development - both at home and at work. I have found that starting with an idea or design, using that to create a proper implementation plan, and then asking an agent to build something has been the most effective workflow for getting what I want (and that I don’t trust most models to not accidentally delete everything from my computer).
So I built an app that combines that workflow with some code dependency graph and sandboxing ideas (semi-structured build manifests with auto-installing tools / isolation) from a startup I previously co-founded, along with a handful of other tools / features (like virtualized code workspace over gRPC that works locally or remotely, starlark for scripting, a debugger with an investigation log and proposed fixes, dependency analyzer, security reviewer, and per-agent models/providers so I can use more expensive models for more complex work, like design or debugging work, and cheaper models for writing code) and built my own day-to-day development assistant that I’m pretty happy with!
As an added bonus, since I don’t like being stuck with one provider, it supports most any LLM provider (including local ones) and I can seamlessly switch between providers or models in the middle of my work if one is offline or going in circles.
I know that there are already way too many markdown editors out there, but I think Kraa still offers something unique in this space (combination of minimal UI, plentiful features and some unique stuff like real-real-time chat).
I'm working on GPS tools to help support my current contract. I've found there are no good tools for tracing a route on a map and having a mobile device think it's traveling that route. I'm not just talking GPS coordinates, but speed, direction, motion detection, precise timing between waypoints, being able to play these trips forward and backward, step by step, etc. I'm talking time-travel debugging for GPS applications.
It's still early days, but I have a demo running. Unfortunately, it requires using a drop-in replacement library for CoreLocation. That alone may make it infeasible.
I'm working on L1 blockchain that turns your hardware into a productive mining asset by leveraging my Rule 30 VDF construction as addressable but irreducible sequencer. The ZK proof system is recursive FRI-Binius and utilizes a binary field tower.
Yesterday, I finally achieved blockchain payload byte-count stability from block 4 and onwards. Today I'm pulling levers to reduce the payload size. Proof-of-everything, so no confirmations needed.
Texcraft is an attempt to re-implement TeX with a modular/LLVM software architecture. These UIs take the same code in Texcraft that has identical behavior to TeX, and illustrates some of the inner workings of TeX. The lig/kern one is missing instructions :)
I have also found at least one bug in Knuth's TeX recently and am currently writing it up.
Working on https://croncoco.io/, an api first scheduling and orchestration platform. This is my first attempt at a paid microservice build, and yes I will admit it is similar some other services that are already out there, but, I still had a ton of fun building everything that goes along with designing and building a small microservice!
I wonder how many people are scraping this thread right now and posting into llm something like “take the best ideas from this thread with highest chance of quick revenue”.
Anyway, I’m working on my manual skills of soldering.
Working mostly on https://localhero.ai, automating i18n translations for product teams (runs as a GitHub Action, translates new strings on PRs matching your brand voice and glossary). Got a new paying customer just now, a pretty big Swedish company, been working closely with the team to add an improved review flow to match their needs.
Most interesting work this month came from a customer in Japan who wanted something I hadn't built called "Easy Japanese" (やさしい日本語), which is like a simplified version for non-native readers. Turned into supporting fully custom locales. Also been improving how the GH action picks up manual changes to target translations in commits, they now get ingested back for review, making things a bit more flexible.
On the side, https://infrabase.ai (AI infrastructure tools directory) had its best month yet, up ~40% visitors MoM. Interesting finding is still the GEO angle, visitors arriving from Claude/ChatGPT/Perplexity spend 2-6 minutes on the site. Been making comparison pages more "extractable" for AI answers with job-tagged tables and some have now held their Perplexity citations for weeks.
Good start of the month with user discussions and feedback.
I'm working on my vehicle building game https://mechacraft.io that I recently released on CrazyGames (my first released game!). It currently sits around 60 CCU which isn't great so I'm polishing/reworking things to see if I can increase it in the next few months. I'm also still looking for a rev share partner that can handle the visual side of things something along the lines of a technical / 3D artist.
80%+ done MVP, for small business use & personal use. First go at full stack development with AI. useful features around voicemail, notifications, and spam prevention (whitelist, blocklist). Built to be robust, secure and available.
2. Intelligent understanding for videos, No MVP yet. Have an interface and use-case in mind that allows people to use understand videos with rich context quickly
currently on pause for leetcoding but I think there's potential here.
Declaring war on big models and bloated RL. Im training autonomous robots/vehicles by building tiny world models that are trained in 5-30 mins on a single GPU, with less than 50M params.
i've spent the last couple years experimenting with LLMs that write procedural, ambient music: instead of generating an audio file, we're using systems that write actual source code (supercollider synths) so the music runs live and can be embedded in and controlled in real time by software like games. a surprising amount of the work is taste -- prompt engineering and curating an aesthetic so the generated code reliably compiles and sounds good, with a compiler and automatic repair in the agent loop when it doesn't build. today, it produces single-synth musical systems, but I'm researching how to orchestrate multiple synths into fuller, evolving compositions with deep musical form and structure. LLMs make algorithmic music far more accessible to artists, and I'm eager to hear the new kinds of music that come out of it. hit me up if you're an audiophile interested in collaborating.
a little suite of word games I've been building as the testbed for Underscore. every puzzle is generative: crosswords with LLM-written clues, a word ladder, a guess-as-it-draws game, and a deduction game scored on how few clues you need. the crossword grids come out of a Rust constraint-satisfaction solver — backtracking fill over a bitmask-indexed word list, enforcing 180-degree rotational symmetry and slot intersections. each generated puzzle gets its own generated, continuously-evolving soundtrack with no audio files involved. right now, the music is generated per puzzle, but it needs some work. it's currently too drone-y, and needs to be more magical/whimsical. where I want to take it is having it respond to the gameplay itself — which is really the whole point of Underscore
Yesterday I tried to take another crack at reverse engineering my e-scooter. I am don't have the energy to sit down and read through the decompiled android app, so I thought I'd try using Qwen3 Coder next for that but it kept looping when analyzing it, probably due to my terrible prompt. I tried with Mistral Vibe and then OpenCode. OpenCode showed me that the agent was trying to search for all kinds of strings over and over again. I am thinking I'll try yet again this week
I am close to buying a Claude sub but the thought of it going haywire and costing me extra money in tokens is too scary yet. Not to mention how much provider LLMs (not sure on the correct terminology for them as opposed to local) could hamper your reverse engineering efforts (looking at you Fable).
I really want to solve this scooter and have my own app for it. There's a firmware update feature in the app, maybe I could dump the firmware at least and that would help. Anyone have suggestions on what language model would be the best for this task (analyze decompiled and obfuscated android app / analyze dumped firmware ) ? i have a 96gb macbook and would prefer a local one (I guess to make myself feel better for having spent money on it?) but something through OpenRouter or whatever would do just fine as well
yeah it was a refurbished / returned in open box m3 max model, cost around the same as 24gb/1tb m4 pro I was consdiering, thought might as well get something cooler.
When the limit is hit, you just cant use claude anymore until the new month / week / day starts , correct? We have Claude at work but we are just told to use it as much as needed and not worry about it so all of us each easily ammass around 100eur in usage every month on the enterprise seats plan.
I have been thinking about building a tool to help teams in different time zones do async work properly. Now with the raise of LLM and agentic workflows/runtimes, it all seems possible so got started on it last weekend.
For now I have a clear vision about what the product should be, what it should do. Mainly, it's a product that should resolve blockers and consensus-seeking problems across time zones.
I'm not sure if something like that would be used, but I really want to try..
I've been working on a inference engine for a System F Omega inspired language and getting to a point where it is starting to feel good in small programs. I'm not sure why I started this, but I'm hoping to make something like an experience reminiscent of Lisp/Smalltalk by working in an interactive environment.
My goal with this language was to pick a set of primitives to compose and express as much as possible.
The two main features I am missing right now are recursive types (I want to do proper mutual recursion and have been procrastinating) and some form of type classes or implicit modules. Structural typing has been useful and I'm finding a lot of features are falling out for free from that.
Long term goal is to create something with performance within a reasonable range of C# / Java etc generally, with tools for opting out of GC. I don't plan on chasing zero cost memory safety, since I want to spend my "budget" on tooling and expressiveness.
Until the language semantics stabilize I plan on generating some pretty naive JS/TS to play around with real programs, and eventually target .NET and native (likely via C++ transpilation)
If someone was interested in trying it, the thinkythoughts folder contains an ASP.NET server side blazor project with monaco and basic (but broken ;)) syntax highlighting and debug output from inference. I don't expect anyone to be interested but if they are and want samples please don't hesitate to ask :)
I'm working on steganographic storage and file encryption tool.
tird /tɪrd/ (an acronym for "this is random data") is a steganographic storage and file encryption tool.
With tird [0], you can:
1. Encrypt file contents and comments with keyfiles and passphrases. The encrypted data format (cryptoblob) is a padded uniform random blob (PURB): it looks like random data and has a randomized size. This reduces metadata leakage from file format and length and allows cryptoblobs to be hidden among random data.
2. Create steganographic (hidden, undetectable) storage (tirdFS) inside container files and block devices. Unlike VeraCrypt and Shufflecake, tirdFS containers do not contain headers; the user specifies the data locations inside the container and is responsible for keeping those locations separate. Any random-looking region of a file or block device may be used as a container.
3. Prevent fast access to decrypted data using time-lock encryption.
4. Use additional tools:
- Create files filled with random data to use as containers or keyfiles.
- Overwrite the contents of block devices and regular files with random data to prepare containers or destroy residual data.
I have been working on, Dhee an AI Video Orchestrator. The main problem with creating AI Videos is that it takes a lot of different tools and co-ordination. What if we could have a expect curated repository of workflows for creating AI Videos or Comics or Music or anything digital honestly!!!
That is why I created Dhee Desktop / Dhee Core ( Open Source https://github.com/dheeai/dhee-desktophttps://github.com/dheeai/dhee-core ) - which allows anyone to author and run their own workflows for creating AI videos. Its local first, fully customizable, private runner for your workflows or any kind of community provided workflows(bundles) too (Comes with a few built in bundles to generate a full multi-scene segment just from story! ).
Its not just a workflow runner, but rather comes with an AI agent to manipulate the generations. AI images and video models often make mistakes ( extra limbs, wrong face etc ), You can ask the Agent to make changes to the prompts, trigger a rerun, Completely change the character and only trigger the exact shots in which he/she appears etc. It knows and tracks the dependencies.
My mission is to make it super easy for anyone and everyone to be able to create AI videos that they want to watch. I am envisioning a future where you make your own movies and watch it on your PC / TV rather than wait for someone else to make a movie that you want.
I am working on an iOS / watchOS app for runners, workout and fitness tracking. I found most apps not doing what I wanted and hope I'll be able to close a meaningful gap. https://runzone.app
I've been working on getting another major release out for my side project Materia[0], hopefully by or on the solstice. Materia is a GitOps continuous delivery tool for Podman quadlets: it handles installing/removing/updating files, installing secrets, restarting services and dependencies, rolling back failed updates, and more. I've been working on this for almost two years now and am pretty happy with how its coming along and the growing user base. Plus it's been a fun excuse to try out some new things, like creating a Varlink API or different CI/CD setups.
Besides Materia itself I've been bouncing around some other ideas for the Podman quadlet ecosystem. The biggest one is Athanor[1], which re-uses the same plan-execute system and primitives provided by Materia to backup Podman volumes.
I've also been kicking around a clustering system for Podman volumes called Firmament that uses Serf and the built-in Podman import/export API to move volumes to where they need to be in the cluster. But this will probably wait until Materia hits 1.0 before I really start putting effort into it. Or if my homelab needs something like it, whichever comes first :).
I made a select-to-copy app [https://pluks.app]. I recently realised copy paste is a 4 step process on mac (natively) - select copy (CMD+C) and then activating the window to be pasted in then CMD V, a simple select to copy and deep click paste will bring this action that we do maybe 100 times a day to 2 steps from 4. Solved it for my own use. Sharing here in case anybody else feels like trying this out.
Multi Agent setup to tackle complex problems using the diversity of multiple LLMs. All for personal use but finding it very useful especially what I call the 'all angles' where it runs multiple strategies parallel then a judge agent presents summary including a view on how the strategies agreed and diverge from one another.
I'm working on a mobile game that is something of a homage to the Forest Brother movement in the Baltic states post Soviet occupation where tens of thousands of men, women, and children fled to the woods and then waged guerrilla warfare for years (most were systematically killed, captured, or lured out with offers of amnesty within a few decades). The mechanics are going to be similar to Rebel Inc but I try to mix in historic details in the events that happen!
I'm working on OSS security tool that can protect you form credential stealers (think Shai-hulud and similar) or prompt-injected agent leaking your secrets.
agent-vault-proxy is a local proxy that injects real secrets into requests in-flight, so a compromised or prompt-injected agent has nothing to steal, feedback welcome: https://github.com/inflightsec/agent-vault-proxy
I’m working on Snapy, a system that helps secondhand retail stores digitize and broadcast their live inventory across Google, Facebook Marketplace, Craigslist, eBay, and more.
We’re live in 3 stores and it’s working great.
The system has two parts: a mobile app that lets employees snap photos of products to generate and publish listings, and a hardware box that sits inline between the barcode scanner and POS to track in-store sales and automatically remove the corresponding listing when something sells.
I’m working on Snapy, a system that helps secondhand retail stores digitize and broadcast their live inventory across Google, Facebook Marketplace, Craigslist, eBay, and more.
We’re live in 3 stores and it’s working great.
The system has two parts: a mobile app that lets employees snap photos of products to generate and publish listings, and a hardware box that sits inline between the barcode scanner and POS to track in-store sales and automatically remove the corresponding listing when something sells
It's full featured with agent loop, gets work done locally.
It's open-source and Swift-based, we built our own inferencing engine since every other engine is based on Python. Check us out - https://github.com/osaurus-ai/osaurus
Im putting together a foraging map which correlates wood, heat, temp, and whatnot to tell me where various edible fungi fruit. It is mostly working so far, has bike trails and we tested it at least once.
The most challenging part was getting MVTs to fly but it is very fast already even in mobile. The fun part is tarring the solver solves correctly :) no public version though but I can upload a screen grab somewhere should anyone be interested.
Sounds interesting! What type of data are you using? I am building something also related to the fungi world, but far less ambitious: a logging diary to identify and log findings so it's easy to log those findings without phone signal.
It’s founded in Rust and incorporates a Deno runtime for extensions.
It’s headless now, via JSON-RPC. I’ve got the basics of a trait based system which will enable different frontends. At the moment, I’ve created an extension for `pi` which allows me to use that as the frontend.
Let me know when you get binaries building or if you need any help on it. I have several Rust agents running in my other projects, but would love to add support for your project in Nemesis8, an agentic coding orchestration tool. Details in my profile.
I finally was able to have some spare time and mental clarity to fix and update my task runner Boku (https://github.com/hxii/boku) based on plans that were pending from like October 2025, and I'm finally happy with the result.
Before that, I vibe coded peek – a CLI network monitor, just because I couldn't find a solution that did what I needed it to do (think Uptime Kuma, but less and in CLI). You can try it out from here: https://github.com/hxii/peek
Now:
1. I'm trying to learn some Swift and SwiftUI so that I can give life to a ADHD-inspired idea I had a year ago that will help me maintain the "one input" framework I created for myself in 2023 (https://0xff.nu/productivity/#the-possible-solution)
2. I'm trying to find a job in a hopefully normal company
Writing a sci-fi book, and it’s finally fleshed out to a point that it’s slightly readable, though more like a script.
As this is all in markdown in one folder, with some text files as lists, I started writing a simple web project to keep track of it all.
Created a website for local community information, services, etc. Something that removes the reliance upon social media for this.
It’s static, making hosting cheap, and in most cases free as it can run on vercel with contentful for blogs and github to store it.
I’m sure there’s another project like it, but it’s always good to practice making something myself.
I was asked to show something for STEM week at my daughter’s school. Started a project to demonstrate AÍ to children. Uses very small training data set, you can write the beginning of a one sentence story, it can keep track of a configurable number of tokens, generates a given number of them. Allows taking steps through the process.
This is the only one I’m vibe coding because I’m not entirely sure on how to implement it, plus I’ve added multiple models.
Have been working on a girlguiding page specifically for the division my wife volunteers with, as they relied upon the older district site that’s woefully lacking. Stuck waiting for approval.
I don’t even have it on GitHub yet, and I’ve been refining it little by little.
Targeting at age 10, late primary school. It doesn’t go deep diving, it’s a light touch, and I think it needs more explanation.
I am a big fan of computer science education for kids that uses a light touch, or even completely offline - things like Computer Engineering for Babies, Turing Tumble, or any game that introduces basic concepts with intuition as opposed to showing the final product of decades of abstraction.
A statically typed s-expression language for dotnet (called bjolang. Because I made it), with fast Rrb vectors and champ maps. No object system, but a trait system with associated types. The looping system is inspired by my own hygienic looping system for guile scheme ( https://rikspucko.koketteriet.se/bjoli/goof-loop )
It is really really fun, but I have no idea what I am doing.
I really dislike async and will hast asyncheonisity behind coroutines (which sadly will be botched because dotnet). i will use them to implement concurrentML sometime in the future. Not unlike go, but the will be called bjoroutines and soaened with the "bjo" keyword.
Other than that, it is pretty standard hindley Milner, but with some limitations to make parallel compilation simpler.
Edit: och: and i will make comprehensions general. (summing (in-vec my-vec)) Or (folding #(+ % a b) :for a (in-list aList) :for b (in-generstor a-generator))
I am working on https://www.accessmrf.com a catalog for all health care prices published by insurers under the Transparency in Coverage rule.
I recently wrote a blog post using Min Hashing to estimate that at least 90% of the 1.17 petabyte dataset are duplicates and I keep investigating new ways of making this dataset manageable. https://www.felixhaba.com/writing/simplifying-healthcare-pri...
Working on a web platform where:
You post a 3D model design request while making a pledge (like submitting a ticket) and the community can make additional pledges to attract designers to make things missing from online 3D model libraries like thingiverse and turbosquid.
Essentially, we're allowing 3D printing enthusiasts who don't know how to design, visual effect (VFX) professionals to request designs from 3D artists, designers, engineers with community funding essentially.
Designers own the IP and are encouraged to enrich the public 3D model libraries while getting paid.
I am working on a three-way large scale arena with classic MMORPG style combat. It's heavily influenced by the Classic MMO Dark Age of Camelot. I am only focusing on the PvP aspects. Working to create the feel of large scale fights while making it easy to jump in and join the fray, even for casual players.
Basically every game server hosting provider bills monthly, but most players don't play all the time. So I'm building instalobby with a friend to provide to gamers on-demand hourly billed game servers.
We're starting with Valheim, but expanding to more games hopefully soon.
(If anybody wants to try we are offering $1 worth of credits to every new account)
In contrast to most other libraries in this space, it knows about Laravel conventions and its ecosystem, and tries to infer as much as possible without explicit annotations, using type hints and doc comments and static analysis.
Where automatic inference isn't possible, you can use targeted attributes to annotate your route handlers.
The result is written as an OpenAPI specification, and (by default) served using a Scalar playground.
We also include a linter command that checks whether all API routes are documented properly, typed correctly, and following your style - this also supports dirty files only, reporting coverage in standard formats, and even automatically fixing some classes of errors!
I've also written tooling to regularly test the library against a set of open source Laravel applications with a published OpenAPI spec. This has proven very solid in detecting improvements and regressions, so much so that I can delegate new features to an AI agent and rest confident that it can verify on its own whether a change breaks anything.
Human powered proof of humanity. Nothing on chain, no blockchains. Just DNS / SSL like decentralization. V0 is admittedly less decentralized as a POC (I control the registry and provider), but anyone can implement the protocol and make this truly decentralized.
Registry (even the current one) is meant to be government by multiple independent entities.
Shared before, didn't get much feedback. I've used AI extensively but very thoughtfully. This is very much not vibe coded.
My one-stop shop combining Letterboxd, Goodreads, Vivino (basically anything).
You use it to 'rank' any abstract entity you choose. The idea is that you'll be able to find common things you like across categories (I think the type of books you like probably influences the kind of movies you like!)
Arcane Scholar: a local first application for all your TTRPG needs. Create and manage characters, classes, spells, and more. Then package them up to share with your table.
In the style of Sauron I’m channeling all my frustration and hatred of slow loading tools that require you to pay a subscription, buy the digital book on every platform you want to use it on, and won’t let you use the physical book from your shelf.
For my first pass I decided on focusing on a character creator for a single game and streamlining the process.
I started with the 5.5e SRD but got frustrated with the sheer amount of text without much actual content ( 100+ A4 double column pages of spells, only 1 subclass per class ). Plus a number of weird and frustrating rules that make it hard to create software for. As I’m using Nimble RPG at the table a bit recently and it has a much nicer license I’ve switched to that and been getting on a lot better. Character creation is almost done and I’be moved to character sheets and persistent object storage now. This is the first major project I’ve done with sveltekit and I’m really enjoying it.
A very simple idea: when you eat more than your maintenance calories, you gain weight; when you eat less than your maintenance calories, you lose weight.
By using an algorithm, we can accurately figure out your maintenance calories more accurately than traditional regression based formulas like katch mc ardle.
It's way more accurate than calorie burn tracking devices like fitness bands and watches. (garmin/apple watch etc...)
MacroCodex helps you spot dips in maintenance calories from metabolic adaptation, then auto adjusts your calorie target and macros so your plan stays aligned with your real maintenance calories (TDEE).
It's very useful to those who find it hard to gain or lose weight.
it's a completely free app, no paywall, no unnecessary data collection.
I continue to build my London based monthly directed-exploration LLM days where we try to collaboratively push through a benchmark. We're doing ARC AGI 2026 again in a couple of weeks: https://playgroup.org.uk/
Recently we built parts of GPT2 from scratch and worked on agent based benchmarks
Turning my Unihertz Jelly Star into an Xperia Play like device. Basically I want to add a slide up controller to this tiny phone. I was reminded of my Gameboy Micro while watching a review of Mina the Hollower on it and now I'm determined to play that game on this tiny thing. No idea if it will actually run.
Learning FreeCAD to create a sliding insert between the body of the phone and the screen. If I can pull that off the rest should be easy.
Unfortunately the controller board will have to connect to the phone over BT although it will use the phone's battery. I wanted to connect it over USB internally but there's no bus on this phone and trying to hijack the lines running to the USB C port would be feature creep that would stop the project. Another idea was to take over an I2C line going to some peripheral I don't care about but I think that would require a custom android kernel so BT it is.
By the way this phone is awesome. Highly recommend for anyone who wishes they didn't need to carry a smart phone.
Recently added support for scripts (like Claude code workflows) and been iterating on the UI for that a bunch.
I also ended up wanting other customized tooling - a more streamlined way to grep, find files and review code that my agent has written. So I wrote a few plugins for that : needle (finder with UI and sorting functions that suit me better), shuck (interactive grepper that has a workflow around refining grep commands) and glean (a review tool that lets you mark parts of the code as seen, leave comments, view diffs commit by commit or collapsed, etc). https://github.com/dlants/dotfiles/tree/main/nvim/lua
These are all in various states of experimental and mostly just for me, but a few of my coworkers and friends have been using magenta and like it.
Just crossed the second year building out Unmeshed - Orchestration Platform.
This is basically a rewrite of Netflix Conductor which was the original platform we built while working at Netflix. At Netflix, infra was "free" so we were generous in all the dependencies we had on that - so we decided to rewrite for cost optimization in this version.
Unmeshed eliminates the glue code thats typically written for resiliency or connecting things together. And our design of execution also offers it the flexibility of being used as a real-time API orchestrator. It even comes with a managed SQLite service (as many as you need), which means we don't need a provider like Supabase to work with stateful workflows.
Fun fact is that in our company, everything we use is actually just static HTML UI built on top of the Unmeshed Platform as backend - like our CRM, SaaS management, Deployments, Finance etc.
I'm working on Navonic (https://www.navonic.co), a wearable for athletes (especially cyclists) and coaches. We've done lots of user testing and are moving from prototyping to DFM and testing/validation, and hopefully shipping soon. It's been a very steep learning curve!
Trying to upgrade my data viz project [0] from Svelte 5.35.7 (pre async) to the latest version and making sure that the performance is not negatively affected (e.g. [1]).
I'm rewriting the open-source core [0] of our product [1] to add more flexible reports.
This is the first time I'm building with the help of AI (Claude), but I don't really let it write code. It has been really helpful in discussing ideas (I'm mostly working alone), like a rubber duck that actually talks back. The code it generates however has many subtle and sometimes obvious mistakes in them, so I decided to write the code myself.
The main benefits over the previous version will be:
- Dynamic reports (ClickHouse queries are generated on the fly)
- Better performance
- Much cleaner and less code
- Better and faster data ingestion including new features, like full support for JSON metadata
- And much more
It feels kinda crazy that I've been working on this project for more than 5 years now and it's still exciting :)
This week I'll start playtests for the combat system of my next game, Today I Will Destroy You, an action adventure with combat inspired by Sekiro.
In this first round I want to see how players respond to the composure-driven knockdown system, and if they find the sample boss fight difficult enough to be interesting, but genuinely fair. In the background, I'm thinking about how to improve the training mode (it only kind of worked on my daughter), so the game can teach you how to play without telling you how to play.
Working on a biological inspired spik8ng neural network written from scratch in Java. So far I implemented homeostatic STDP, dendritic branches competition, lateral neuronal inhibition (with different strategies), dopamine based rewarding and an adaptive stabilizer.
Multiple emispheres and layers are supported.
Why I'm doing It? Just for fun and learning!
My very first goal is to make a simple OCR working..
Then, the real fun would be having a cockroach moving in my house driven by this virtual brain.
I'm building a coupon matchup aggregator for my mom, who knows her way around digital coupon clipping and rebate programs like ibotta, but struggles with juggling all the coupon bloggers that she follows
Choose your genres (and more filters) and get auto updating playlists from your music library. Also just added a new feature - select a few (or one) playlists and create a "mirror", with tracks belonging to the artists of your selected playlists.
I’m developing a class for non-technical people on the responsible use of AI.
Continuing development of online training for software testers, with a heavy emphasis on AI, since that’s where the demand is.
During a livestreamed demo yesterday, I ran into a ridiculous bug in Copilot for Excel. After all these years Microsoft still can’t manage the basics of reliability and still deny that they need good testers.
I’ve continued to work on a phone app + website (https://MyBulkCards.com) to scan Pokemon bulk cards and tag/organize where they are stored. I added a bunch more features like finding a friend, searching through friends cards, and trading.
It's been pretty fun to build. Trained a couple of models to identify a card that run on the phone app. They work very well and are comparable, and much better than many, to any other card identifier in the market. As the models get more complicated training is getting a bit longer. I'm at about 9 hours per epoch on my Mac M4 with 16G of memory.
The Android phone app is in public test with a couple of my local group testing. The app is built in React Native, and I’m hoping to get an iPhone version out soon since there are a bunch of iPhone peeps.
Software distribution is getting harder. New products launch every day, and paid advertising has become increasingly competitive. Many companies spend money on ads and get poor results, not because the platforms don’t work, but because running effective campaigns requires a lot of experimentation, creative work, and ongoing optimization.
Over the years, I built a collection of scripts to speed up ad creation, testing, and campaign management. As generative AI improved, it became possible to automate much more of that workflow, and those scripts gradually evolved into a product.
The idea is simple: instead of manually creating dozens of ads, users can generate different angles, messages, layouts, and formats from a single brief. They can then launch those ads on platforms like Meta Ads and automate parts of the testing process using rules and scheduled workflows, similar to cron jobs.
For fun, this month I shipped Foreign Trivia - a wordle-style tiny daily trivia game where every question is in a different language, with tap-to-translate words as you play. It's part language-learning, part pattern-matching and part trivia. A new puzzle every day. https://foreigntrivia.com
I've also been working on an open source protocol / reference implementation for user-owned AI memory, with the basic idea being that as applied AI scales, more products will derive more claims about users, teams and workflows from chats, docs, calendars, emails, etc, and they shouldn't be trapped inside of one product. Right now there's a lot of opinions on what shape memory should take internally, but I'm focused less on standardizing that part, and more focused on the primitives around it: requiring inspection, correction, revocation and treating portability as first-class. It's early but I'm starting to build more of a clear vision around it and would love feedback from anyone working on local-first software, personal data stores, capability security, knowledge graphs, etc. https://github.com/danielrmay/likewise
> I've also been working on an open source protocol / reference implementation for user-owned AI memory
I've thought about how to fix this too. I'm "locked in" to OpenAI because of what it knows about me. Literally it's told me things like "blah blah but you shouldn't do that because you take X medication which has Y in it" and I'm like "...really? can you reference that?" and it gives me some old thread where I chatted about it and unbeknownst to me I completely forgot.
In other words it's legit helpful as my "second brain", but I also don't like that I'm locked in and can't bring all this shared memory/context over.
Yes, exactly. Over the past few months I've been trying to refine the vision here - it started with me thinking about my own use case in personal AI, and now has grown into me understanding how there's actually an pervasive governance problem in agentic applied AI right now - we know inference is inherently fallible and yet have none of the open standards for trust and safety we know can protect consumers and businesses.
Well, I guess the main priority right now should be videos for my YouTube channel and articles for the website. I recently had a three hour chat with the owner of a massive channel (about 500K subs), and I'm currently trying to edit that down to both a text based interview article and a somewhat more detailed video version.
Also been working on a mod for a SNES game I grew up with as a side project for the last 12 years or so, and I promise that one day I actually hope to finish it. It's just I have a really bad tendency to fall victim to scope creep/feature creep, and that only got worse when I taught myself 65c816 assembly language and decided I'd add 3-4 unique mechanics per level in the style of games like Donkey Kong Country Tropical Freeze.
I sometimes need to have a quick but realistic model of an optical system without paying a few thousand for some of the well known commercial offerings, so I've been building this.
https://www.storystarling.com - create a non-fiction children's book explaining your super-niche-geek topic to your kid. Pick any topic, your kid becomes the little explorer, we illustrate and print it. Requires registration, but then lets you read the whole book before paying.
The original idea came from repeatedly seeing the same workflow whenever someone wanted to expose an existing API to Claude, Cursor, or another agent:
* Parse an OpenAPI spec
* Generate tools
* Handle auth
* Deploy an MCP server
* Maintain it forever
I initially thought tool generation was the hard part.
After talking with developers, it seems the bigger challenges are authentication, permissions, endpoint selection, and safely exposing production APIs to AI agents.
MCPForge takes an OpenAPI spec or Postman collection and creates a hosted MCP endpoint. Recently, I've been spending more time on auth injection, tool permissions, and preventing destructive endpoints from being exposed by default than on generation itself.
Still very early (launched this week), and I'm mostly looking for feedback from people using MCP in production.
Been building a file manager for almost four years that combines the best of Notion and Obsidian while remaining a competent file manager in the process. It's called Phials.
Not technically released even though the site is live, but close enough to a beta at this point.
One is Rad [0], a programming language tailored for writing CLI scripts and tools (mainly an alternative to Bash), taking a declarative approach to things like script arguments. Latest push has been largely on static type analysis, since making that really good is the sort of thing that helps both people and AI agents write good Rad.
Second project is Kan [2], a Kanban board which operates on text files on your machine, and is designed to be Git friendly so you can check it into your repo.
- Imagined job I want to do: Teach software from the ground up, with good illustrations.
- Side: https://peace.mk/ - Create my own automation framework, because I want to make it clear what infrastructure-as-code is going to do before/during/after you run it
- side-side: https://azriel.im/disposition - a diagram generator like graphviz, but supports markdown, to visualise what infrastructure exists / will exist / will be deleted / is in progress when automation is running
Still working on https://radius.to/ - a Meetup.com alternative of sorts - with fairer organiser pricing for smaller groups.
I posted a Show HN [1] here a while back, got tons of great feedback, and have been slowly improving it since, with no real marketing. Another Show HN is probably overdue!
More recently, I've been working on adding features around meeting individuals/smaller impromptu groups over activities you're doing - i.e. "I'm going for a cycle today - who wants to join", so I'm excited to see how that goes. There are some UI examples from that on the landing page.
I've designed my first automated test equipment (4 voltmeters with 4 gains, 4 ammeters with 4 shunts, 4 regulated voltage sources) in kicad and now I'm slowly assembling it, testing and calibrating: https://imgur.com/a/ate444-Y0cORf2
Working on my simple, frictionless journaling tool, that focuses on simplicity, and being lightweight, but still quite powerful.
And I plan to have more features like: time tracking, kanban, read later links, scripting etc, in the same simple interface.
The important part is, data is and will be stored in a single text file. No online interaction.
Right now you can
- Take notes
- Create to-do/mark them done
- Organize notes/todo in projects or tags
- Inline calculation using fend [1]
- Powerful undo/redo
- Archive notes that are not needed
It's Agentic QA + auto-provisioning sandboxes. Makes it plug and play to do code reviews that actually run your code instead of looking at it really hard. B/c the agents control all of the environment (ie running all of the services), it's able to collect runtime evidence about pretty much everything.
I'm working on TableForge[0], it's a browser based, solo or multiplayer, D&D 5e game. TTRPG DMing can be effort-heavy and my friend group constantly has trouble finding enough time to play together let alone set it up.
In TableForge, the DM is agentic with access to tools strictly following 5e rules. The DM is responsible for narration and reacting to players but your character sheet, inventory, spells are all real server resources you manage. The DM can interact with them through deterministic 5e-based tools (dice rolls, damage, sheet updates, memory). Players can play in real time or async.
You can provide the DM a premise (or pick one from the library) and it'll flesh out a full campaign story arc. Either way it's a fresh story arc reacting to your actual decisions, every time.
I've been working on a website that tells you when it's time to open or close the windows. You register with a location, your preferred method of notification, and the rules for what you consider open-windows weather to be.
Range of temperature is the big one for rules, but you can also require humidity, wind speed. Eventually would be nice to add air quality if there's a sensor nearby.
You don't need any local devices - sensors, motors, etc. You just get an email/text/web push of your choice when the weather is nice and some fresh air is freely available.
I've had a home assistant routine for this running for myself for years, but the 80% version requires nothing more than weather data. Human in the loop automation (I physically open/close the windows).
The problem I kept hitting with agent workflows (especially cloud hosted agents) was that the artifacts they produced became really awkward to handle across different cloud sessions.
So I built Artifacta as the boring storage layer underneath. Agents store and retrieve artifacts via CLI, REST API, Python SDK, or an MCP server. Artifacts are grouped by session/agent metadata, deduped on identical content, and safe to retry (idempotency keys), making it easy to handle artifacts across different sessions.
Would love any feedback for those who run mutli-agent orchestration or if you deal with artifacts across different agents.
With this framework, I'm making (among other things) an early literacy app at https://letterspractice.com. My aim here is to hit >= 75% efficacy of Mentava at <= 1% of the price.
The app is near to production readiness, and I'd be happy to share access now with anyone who has verbal but non-literate kids. Be in touch if interested at colin at letterspractice.com
Working on exocomp [1] and gooey [2]. The former being an agentic environment for pentesting and reverse engineering and the latter being a UI framework in Go.
Currently working on some networking parts, because I want multiple exocomp instances to be able to cooperate in terms of knowledge sharing and workforce sharing. So I'm experimenting with websockets combined with multicast DNS-SD via UDP sockets. Might be kinda nice if I can make all services discoverable and plug and play. Also using DNS-SD for my llama.cpp wrapper already, which allows local model and inference service discovery quite nicely already.
I’m in the first weeks of designing nub: Not Unix, Basically. The motto is “general-purpose, provably correct software, for everyone”. The idea is to build, on top of seL4, a software stack that builds compile time capability guarantees and other high-assurance primitives into every piece of software by default.
“nub” is a good name because it can also be read as “noob”, which I am, when it comes to PL, type systems, and OS design. But I’m loving the deep connections that I am learning to draw across subjects like computability theory, functional programming, and brass-tacks software development.
For example, I find myself understanding the purpose of the borrow checker in Rust (“to make race conditions impossible” is my understanding: feel free to correct me / add color).
No website or GitHub repo yet. I’m brushing up on classical logic and learning Idris. Installed QEMU today.
Every API has a contract - the rules for how it should behave. You can't withdraw more than the balance. You can't delete a resource with active references. You can't re-create what already exists. But usually these rules are never written down in one place. Accordant lets you write the contract directly, as executable code. Not documentation that drifts, but code - if the implementation stops behaving according to the contract, you get immediate failures. Not only can you use the executable spec to validate _arbitrary_ scenarios, you can also use the spec - a first class construct - to mechanically explore the state space of a system and generate interesting test sequences. The docs above have examples.
Also worth calling out that we've used the framework to model a number of complex, distributed real-world systems: those involving async processes, concurrency, retries and crash consistency. These are non-trivial specs (and they pair quite well with techniques like deterministic simulation testing). Great care has been taken to ensure the specs remain readable and concise despite that richness of behavior. For those of you old timers who might be familiar with Spec#/SpecExplorer and NModel, this model-based testing library is a descendant of that line of work.
With the rise in AI-assisted software development, I feel we need richer ways of specifying and validating software and I feel quite excited and bullish about the possibilities here. There's a lot more to say on the topic - follow my twitter feed if interested in more updates ;)
This is interesting; I see the docs mention that polling support is built in for asynchronous background tasks. What about event-driven systems where a message will be published when a task completes (such as from a message broker/pubsub system)?
The first is that some effect happens asynchronously, potentially interleaved with other operations. Whether a client observes completion by polling or by receiving an event from a message broker is orthogonal to the specification itself - the model looks essentially the same in both cases. The built-in test executor uses polling, but that's an execution strategy, not a specification construct.
If you have a trace containing both requests/responses and observed events, you can use the model to check that the trace conforms to the specification. In practice, it helps if the events can be localized to some interval in the execution (e.g. "this happened after A and before B"); otherwise the checker has to consider many more possible concurrent interleavings.
The conformance testing docs hint at how this can be done, but don't yet show an event-driven example. It's a good enough question that I'll write a dedicated doc page on it.
Property-based testing and model-based testing are closely related. Both ask the developer to state the expected behavior of a system (whether you call it a property, invariant, model, specification, or contract) and then validate that behavior over arbitrary inputs and arbitrary sequences of operations. Property-based testing frameworks also typically provide fuzzing and shrinking.
Where we felt there was a gap was in expressing rich stateful behavior: models involving non-determinism (e.g. a timeout where the write may or may not have committed), concurrency, and eventual asynchronous completion, and then checking that an observed execution trace conforms to that model. Accordant aims to make those kinds of specifications concise and readable.
Once you have such a model, it's possible to integrate it with the fuzzing and shrinking capabilities of existing property-based testing libraries. We'll have documentation on that integration soon.
I’m still trying to figure out how to convert “Meitian’s” 2,000 users into my own customers. Currently, the free tarot reading feature I offer has been very well-received, but I’m still unsure how to provide product features that would make users more willing to pay.
If you’re also a tarot enthusiast, please let me know: what kind of services would you be willing to pay for?
Bit late here! I'm working on Etymon, a daily etymology puzzle. Each puzzle has six clues to help reveal a hidden word. The cognate clue (4) gives two words that share the same root with the hidden word. Today's are SOFA + DIVAN. I've made it free mon - fri, no email needed, and gated the weekends and puzzle archive. https://etymonpuzzle.com/
I'm working on an app to create interactive versions of tatebanko (traditional Japanese paper diorama). It's working well and I'm busy refining it as I build out a suite of example files.
Most tools only let you enter a single color and then attempt to autogenerate or use AI to create the other tints/shades, which often don't do a great job and are really limiting when you're creating branded palettes.
The focus on this tool is to let you tweak every tint/shade while keeping an eye on accessible contrast. The curve based editor shows you how the H/S/L values of your colors vary across a color scale and is meant to make the editing process quick and intuitive enough that you won't want to give up control to autogeneration.
You play a duck in a small shared town. You pick a job, pay rent, post on a Twitter-style feed, vote in local elections. The simulation keeps running when you close the tab. No PvP, no loot boxes, no combat. Playtime is a few minutes a day by design.
This looks interesting. I thought I would leave this feedback incase it's helpful. There is not enough information about what the experience is like to convince me to sign up. You might consider letting players play around a bit without signing up first.
Thank you for the feedback :) Letting players play before signing up might not be ideal for this case but I probably need to make the landing page better.
TensorZero, LLMOps gateway, was archived yesterday and I forked it to continue development and keep it open source. I also applied for 6 months of codex credits which I will dedicate to the project.
I've built similar a couple of different ways. I'm currently focusing on running outputs through a local model to to enable tokenmaxing before sending onto a model I am paying with credits, not OAuth.
Aside from dipping my foot into games with Godot I've pulled back an old project to solve a me problem. A few years ago I wrote a tool to tell you what weapons in Dark Souls 1 you are missing to get the Knights Honour achievement on steam.
Part of this required that I manually parse a binary save file and extract the information. This was done through lots of trial and error and looking at other java implementations.
What I would have prefered is some sort of descriptor language that lets me generate the parser and interfaces for everything so I just drop the binary stream into a parse function and get my typed object back.
I'm working on creating a TypeSpec Library and Emitter for this so that you can describe everything in Typespec as to where and what is in the file and have it parse.
One test stack on the platform been running entirely automated for months now to research, author, code, ship, and promote https//ainews.personastack.ai completely on its own. Many more things are possible like automatically identifying fixing, and shipping in response to 500 errors, personal assistants, or whatever you can come up with. I'm working on moving both my other open source projects over to be run by AI teams right now.
I'm building a tool that helps small volunteer orgs. manage their property/facility. Something to replace the filing cabinet, text threads and email inboxes that get lost when your volunteer treasurer or retired admin moves on. Specifically building for my wife and I to take care of our house and for our small church who manages a building. The idea is you take a picture of the plumbers invoice, forward the insurance policy, or write down the last time the roof was inspected all in one place. Most CMMS are too heavy for a small org. and having "that one guy" setup a process is too brittle. https://www.myplacekeeper.com/
I like your app, and was a Premium subscriber for a while; I cancelled in a big purge, but seeing you post here has me reconsidering. Great product, the privacy angle was the biggest plus for me personally. Best of luck to you!
Working on a mobile app, a simple free BMI calculator for Android. Nothing new, fancy, or groundbreaking. It's just that I wanted to start from somewhere. Vibe coding it in Expo/React and figuring out the entire process
Have been working on three micro-saas, all built in Elixir/Phoenix:
https://feedbun.com - a browser extension that decodes food labels and recipes on any website for healthy eating, with science-backed research summaries and recommendations.
https://rizz.farm - a lead gen tool for Reddit that focuses on helping instead of selling, to build long-lasting organic traffic.
https://persumi.com - a blogging platform that turns articles into audio, and to showcase your different interests or "personas".
Took a long break earlier this year to recharge, but now I'm back at it again, mostly working on Feedbun, about to launch it as an early alpha. :)
I've been building https://rerouter.app/. Similar products such as make.com already exist but I wanted some things to work differently, for example you can use it immediately without creating an account.
Not sure if it's actually useful yet but here's some things you can do now:
- Categorize instant messages incoming from different
platforms using your local ollama
- Use regexes to detect keywords
- Act as a bridge between multiple platforms
- Keep traces of deleted messages by relaying them somewhere
- Choose whether the connections go out from your machine or the proxies provided
- Supports authentication methods that may be against TOS (e.g user account as the bot for discord)
It still needs refining, for example it's not obvious yet how to use the app and the examples are outdated
I'm writing an extension to the mkv file specification to embed simple scripts that would allow someone to do choose-your-own-adventure style videos directly in the file themselves without outside assets. I'm also making modifications to VLC and mpv so they can play these directly. I've had some success already, but I've discovered a few features of existing videos like Bandersnatch that I've had to go back and add into the specification.
On top of that, it's lead me down the rabbit hole of a 1995 (limited) theatrical movie called Mr. Payback, which may have only ever existed on 50 sets of laserdiscs distributed to those theaters. I'm hoping to track down a copy of it... if anyone had any clues on that one, I'd love to hear them. I'd purchase a Domesday Dupe device and dump it. But it may be a genuine lost movie.
I am working on vorfract, a voronoi voxel world. I've always found the shapes generated by voronoi diagrams so interesting and I quite like the aesthetic.
What new ideas am I thinking about?
I'm pretty sure there are plenty of things left to discover about voronoi diagrams, but for the time being, I'm mainly exploring what's possible to build by using voronoi cells as voxels and devising various tools for cutting them.
Since they're convex polyhedra, almost any shape is possible (in principle, if not in practice) by combining several cells.
What I find particularily interesting is that a solid 3D world can emerge from just a collection of points arranged in different patterns.
https://www.useorganizer.com/ helps you organize stuff primarily but can also double as photo album and private log. Open source and local storage. Not so much working on. It is complete and does what I wanted it to.
I'm just starting the design of a cmsis-svd-lsp Language Server application that can be used with any LSP capable editor to provide legal CMSIS names for their STM32xx MCU registers and bitfields during coding, simply by using the SVD file for their model. MIT licensed.
It will include the correct name, absolute address, bit offset and width plus a bitfield description.
This is needed for bare metal coding (in any language) without using the massive monolithic systems from the manufacturers.
I've previously made a Mecrisp-Stellaris Forth Language Server as a test run and it works fine with helix editor.
Still working on my food sharing platform since the pandemic. However, acquiring more partner restaurants is a thankless job and food donations tend to be clustered in particular areas. Still hoping for a lucky news story that might make this interesting for partners without my relentless outreach.
Working with a variety of AI models (Claude, Grok Build, various locally run models) and agents, I am scratching an itch.
When people deploy python and perl code, they have to either export their entire environment, or build a container. The latter is not possible in a number of deployment cases, and the former carries all manner of dependency radius gotchas.
So I am building (ok, I am prompting/testing/reviewing, the agent is doing the heavy lift) compilers for each of python 3.14.x [1] right now, and perl 5.42.x [2], that can generate static code.
Early stages, perlc does work well, pyc is a work in progress.
I've been building this little animation tool I’ve wanted for years, inspired by one of Bret Victor’s demos from his talk “Inventing on Principle”. I wrote about it here [1].
Basically, instead of setting keyframes and tweens, you perform animations in real time: select a layer, manipulate its properties and the timeline records every frame.
No install, no account needed. It's like Excalidraw, for animation.
I still have some ideas and hope to keep evolving it. And I hope other people find it useful for making neat videos.
For the last month I've worked on a firefox plugin that allows me to send webhooks to my home assistant.
In my living room I have a linux pc connected to my TV and I'm using this in 2 ways:
- Automatically set lights when media starts/stops playing. This way I can turn on some accent lighting when I pause a movie to go to the bathroom and automatically turn them off when I resume the movie
- When media is playing I calculate the color that best represents the content and export it to home assistant use it as a poor man 'ambilight' with a led strip strategically placed behind my TV
I think the next logical step is to find a way to automatically track the content I'm watching so I can have some high level stats about my viewing habits.
After ~20 years of long-haul travel, I spent the last 9 months building Jetlag Coach, in parallel with my busy life (full time job toddler and pregnant wife!). You give it your chronotype and your actual itinerary (multi-leg and layovers included) and an optimization engine generates a personalized schedule for light, sleep timing, caffeine and melatonin to shift your circadian clock toward the destination time zone.
At core it turned out to be a complex optimization problem and a real challenge to tackle. I also put a lot of care in the UI/UX, while I usually focus more on backend work. It's working well, I am just finalizing the handling of some of the nastier edge cases
The service is composed of two open-source services, namely a Nextcloud app (Astrolabe) and backend (nextcloud-mcp-server). I use the service as an MCP server across a number of apps, and others use it primarily for semantic search over large numbers of documents.
Both are open source, and I'm working on a managed offering, completely based in the EU, for individuals/teams that already use Nextcloud and want to be able to use semantic search across some or all of their documents.
Essentially your data stays in Nextcloud, and the MCP server backend keeps a vectordb in sync to enable semantic queries over your content. The number of supported apps is growing, including:
Im working on a launching a webapp. Im super close to launching with a show hn but im super nervous about first impressions.
This is the first time ive actually spoken about it online, and tbh I dont think im gonna drop the URL just yet..
If anyone has any SOTA show hn tips i'd really appreciate it.
Having just tested my app with very niche online groups, friends and cold messaging some people who I thought might have wanted what I'm building, and getting almost no response - my advice would be to burst that bubble early. As a general rule, no one cares what you're building anymore - just look at this thread.
I dont think its odd to have placeholder testimonials as im developing the testimonial components. I have some real ones from IRL people and my friends and family whove used it ready to be put into the site if it matters.
But there should be some indiciation im not launched so I added a banner thanks for the nudge
- SophAI (https://www.sophai.app/): an app to connect the dots across cross-domain. As a CTO, I read across multiple domains (tech, design, business, e-com) and often have to connect the dots. I am building this primarily for myself. It is basically a rss parser with a big AI prompt to connect the dots across the blog posts. As I type this, I'm working on adding podcasts to the app.
- CTO field notes (https://www.ctofieldnotes.com/): collection of essays growing out of my 30 years in IT services. One essay every Tuesday.
I continue to work on Poser, an AI video analysis tool for skiers. Upload a ski video clip, get feedback. Detecting the pose was difficult, now I need to actually give the feedback which is a lot harder.
It’s going really well so far in the second month, to the point where I now have an advanced class and some possible organizations lined up that want me to help to train their staff.
I need to fill up my classes or get org contracts so tell who you know.
The cool thing also now is that we have a small community of builders in the discord that have shipped so it’s good to see people working together.
Currently fleshing out my boggle-like empire. serpentinegame.com. I've got ELO rated rooms, a daily room, and a new infinite room. I've been doing this since 2008 but recently rewrote everything from scratch and seeing how far I can push the online multiplayer boggle niche.
I'm working on a competitive coding gameshow. I'm imagining a combination of great british bakeoff, battle bots, and dota. Basically contestants get dropped into a fully equipped dev machine (all the bells and whistles one could want/expect including neovim, agent harnesses, cool styling, etc and if you want you can always clone your dotfiles and stow them!). I've gotten a decent prototype that live streams from Fly.io sprites to twitch, and I'm able to voice over or have OpenAI do commentary on the match. I've got a demo here: https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2792893261. Still a ways to go, but it seemed like a fun way to tinker with Sprites.
For my demos I've been running 3 minute sessions but I'm planning to run 30-60 minute sessions depending on the scenario. I want to see people push the boundary of what can be done in an hour (with an agent or without, it's up to the contestant!) and ultimately have the match VODs serve as entertainment but also reference examples for "good" development workflows.
Here to ask if anyone would be interested in a step by step guide on jailbreaking frontier LLM models, something I've been working on from time to time and never felt the need to share since it's pretty boring considering the fact that you're just tricking the model / classifier with noise or/and having a list of regex of replacements to work around guardrails. If you want to jailbreak yourself I recommend starting with opus 4.7 since it has exceptional system prompt following to a degree where if you put it in a simulated environment and coached it to do as much harm as possible it will happily do so including the fact that it will jailbreak itself and incl. other models to accomplish a goal.
I've been building a browser-based toolkit for MSP and security work.
It started because I found myself opening a lot of different sites to get a quick picture of a domain. The main project right now is a domain security assessment tool that combines DNS, WHOIS, MX, SPF, DKIM, DMARC, DNSSEC, TLS/SSL, security headers, redirects, and other public metadata into a single report with findings and recommendations.
I've also been building out the smaller supporting tools around it as they come up in day-to-day IT work.
Still a work in progress, but I've been having fun building it.
Been working on an open source, free, Heroku alternative at https://canine.sh for about two years.
I feel like even after all these years we’re still missing the devex that Heroku provided.
Canine basically wraps a Kubernetes cluster -- gives you a heroku like interface to deploy applications to. At some point, if you get big enough that canine is no longer powerful enough, you can just "eject" canine from kubernetes, and continue using kubernetes directly, without having to do any migrations.
Just passed about 2000 developers, at this point most of my work is resolving bug fixes, adding helper text everywhere to make things cleaner, and supporting setups I've never encountered like homelabs with changing IP's
I have been building coding agent: VT Code and I'm very proud of it.
https://github.com/vinhnx/VTCode > It's an open-source coding agent with LLM-native code understanding and robust shell safety. Supports multiple LLM providers with automatic failover and efficient context management.
Recently it just got the 500th tagged release. The project has been started since August 2025, and the coding agent VT Code itself I believe to be stable and ready to use. Thankfully, I got help from the community; recently, we pushed quite a lot of releases, enhancements, and bug fixes.
Still working on GhanaHousePlanner, we have integrated a robust cost estimator based on geometry of the house generated from the floorplans, this has allowed us to achieve very good results for the estimated cost by factoring in lots of inputs that would have been complex to handle since we generate the plans on the fly.
We are currently expanding the architectural drawings and structural analysis and also export formats. The goal is still to offer everyone in tropical countries the tools to understand their house construction before they go to meet professionals.
Recently migrated over from Grav to a smaller SSG that I made myself in Go, the idea being that I'll minimize the dependencies I have to maintain, since that becomes harder and harder the more software I use. Even did some basic load testing, seems good so far: https://blog.kronis.dev/blog/i-rebuilt-my-blog-and-then-brok...
Also working on a Claude Code launcher that allows easily swapping between 3rd party provider profiles: https://ccode.kronis.dev/
https://www.novopathmedical.com/ - evidence-based guidance of diet, exercise, and mental health via SMS for end users. Clinician-guided feedback to bots.
https://github.com/rush86999/atom - ai agent workforce. Harder than expected. There are so many issues with sync with 3rd party apps. Need to launch the first one, so this is getting put on the back burner. landing page: https://atomagentos.com/
A Nix flake for a GregTech New Horizons server updated to the latest daily build. This normally requires quite a lot of administration with a ton of manual bootstrapping steps, and even though there are solutions for normal modded Minecraft servers, GTNH requires a bit more legwork. My hope is to make it an extremely simple home-manager module that works on NixOS and darwin that syncs the manifest to a configured server (had to patch Caedis' gtnh-daily-updater to achieve this), and a NixOS module that manages said server. It's already up and running on my personal machine, so I just have to refactor it to be configurable - I love working with Nix so much I wish I could do it for a job T.T
CS Final Year Project: Multi-vendor Food Delivery System
2 person team and we didn't do anything manually beside creating the entity relationship, and briefly documenting the overall design system we wanted. Now we are sitting on an almost 80% completed system with 6 more months in hand.
I am working ton Mixor a news comment site. http://www.asiaviewnews.com/gigabots/threads. It has posts about tech, and politics and a little finance. It's meant to be about anything. Right now you can post to start a new thread, and reply to existing threads. It has a bug on loading that I can't find the solution for, if you reload it should work. It also has a more recent issue, that I haven't renewed the ssl certificate for it, should work in Chrome if you click on the warning about visiting the website.
A browser extension to export conversations from Teams. I initially needed a readily available tool, I was ready to pay a few bucks for it. Turns out there isn’t an alternative for me because existing ones require instance admin to enable this, Microsoft Graph API permission, or some other requirement which I could not fulfill. Then started vibe coding it. Once it started working, I thought “I’m sure that there are people out there who needs smth like this” and pushed to GitHub and extension stores of popular browsers. Now more than 15000 people use this.
https://github.com/gediz/teams-web-chat-exporter
https://mdview.io - the best way to read big technical documentations. Right now I am working on Grill Me feature for rigorously questioning and stress-testing plans or designs without leaving the app ui
I’m developing BaseRef (https://getbaseref.com), a requirements/risk/test management and documentation SaaS tool focused on medical device startups. There are competitors in the space but most are enterprise tools for enterprise customers. My primary differentiators are reasonable up-front prices, and easy inclusion of traced items in a wiki/notion-like collaborative document editor. It’s not a sexy or original idea, but I think there is a gap in the market for a solid business. I’ve been an embedded software consultant for medical device startups for years, but this is my first SaaS business.
That's interesting. Traceability from Requirements to Architecture & Design (in both directions) is an issue that I've thought of building a tool for after coming across some projects that were doing a bad job of managing it. Risk & HA seem like they'd want to be in a separate tool, though.
Suggestion for your landing page: state what FDA submission docs the tool will generate and maybe mention 62304 compliance.
A contracts management platform for the events industry in Brazil. WhatsApp has turned communications chaotic between vendors and customers across the event's lifecycle. Both parties suffer from not having a single version of the truth about what is promised to the event. The product helps in that sense.
A human capital platform that helps companies comply with Brazilian labor laws in regards to time control via punch clocks. It also helps managing contractors and freelancers.
Looking for a publisher to my first book "The Least You Must Know About Computers to be Free". A sci-fi technical novel about open hardware, FOSS, cryptography, AI and Bitcoin. It aims at teens and young adults.
Raising my two teenage children. (hardest project)
The last few months I’ve been reading a lot about neuroscience behind learning and practicing music and I’m fascinated by the subject. It has helped me realise why the app works for me, as well as my own mistakes that held back my progress for many years despite putting in decent efforts.
It was a much needed inspiration to continue working on it with a re-evaluated roadmap.
I am building on a publishing platform that aims to go against some of the tide.
Strictly human content, pagination instead of endless feeds, one-off payments instead of subscriptions, linear feed by default, public profile scoring instead of secretive algorithms.
https://gymify.it to seamlessly integrate exercise into daily life, rather than rigidly scheduling and compartmentalizing it. Small exercise sessions of 1-2 minutes throughout the day clear my head, give me fresh ideas, and keep me in shape. I'm building this site as a tool to keep track in a pressure-free way and to discover new exercises. It's partly about social accountability and one of the key ideas is to see what people do and don't do in terms of exercise.
I’ve been going all-in on regular writing this year, and have published a blog post a week since December (https://mattcasmith.net/).
My most recent piece is about the privacy-impacting plans the UK government announced this week, but my favourite recent output is an essay titled Care About What You Do, which brings together a lot of small thoughts I’ve had for years into a consistent thread.
More technically, have found some time in recent weeks to work on my site design backlog - most recently re-implementing inline newsletter signups after the email platform’s embedded widget broke.
It's a CD tool for Kubernetes built on top of Flux and OpenKruise canary controller to bring a full end to end delivery on Kubernetes in a declarative way without the pipelines. Every stage of the delivery is just a composable component (health checks, smoke tests, schedules, environment promotions).
I was thinking about how to get LLMs to efficiently generate narrative content for unscripted NPCs and then I ended up building Open-Write. What started as a test to see where the system would break down on long-form content generation, just became a system for producing long-form content generation.
Since I shared it last time, I have been still working on it — adding more content, tiny improvements and enrichments, and socializing it so that i can get some crowdsourced help with the content and research. I would say I worked more on the CMS/admin panel behind it.
Those of you who are new to this, Qawwali is predominantly south asian genre that is centuries old. My goal with this website is more like wiki, or a gateway for anyone wanting to get introduced to the genre. One of the main, and the complex feature that i worked on was building family trees/lineages.
https://www.qavvali.com/
I built Update My Address Book (https://updatemyaddressbook.com) more than a decade ago to make it easier to collect addresses from family and friends so that we could send out Christmas cards. It's been the app that I've rewritten every few years when I want to test out a new tech stack.
After getting laid off a few weeks ago, I decided to give it a complete rewrite with some new features (offline support, lists, passkeys) and a new UI.
It's still very much a work in progress, but I'd really appreciate any feedback that could help make it useful for others as well.
I'm working on Topicle (https://topicle.com), a Reddit-inspired link sharing, voting and discussion platform that rethinks a bunch of basic aspects like moderation, anti-abuse and privacy to try to address some of the biggest pain points. Every moderation action has an admin appeal available, bots and astroturfing are aggressively monitored and policed, comment histories are always visible, no VPNs or datacenter IPs for write operations. Everything is self-hosted (Umami analytics) and there's no data leakage to big ad networks. The full feature set is listed here: https://topicle.com/about
There are also technologies new-ish to this kind of site included like every thread is a live thread via websockets, your post and comment scores update in realtime, notifications are realtime, you can DM other users and receive your messages immediately. So it's distinct from the everything is a hard page load world of 10 years ago and blurring into native software in a browser.
What I'm working on right now is a SwiftUI iOS app, because one of the most interesting observations from analytics has been that the internet is 70-80% mobile devices now, contrary to my 10 years out-of-date conception that people were mostly using the internet on desktops. So a mobile app seems non-negotiable to reach most users. I have a PWA already, but early users have repeatedly requested an official App/Play Store presence.
The stack is somewhat unique in that it's built with a Swift/Vapor framework (https://vapor.codes/) backend, with a more standard React Router 7 (SSR) frontend. I picked this framework mostly because I'm historically an iOS dev, but have found it to be very capable in its own right. I later discovered Apple themselves are using Vapor for some web services and have a team devoted to maintaining the server library (SwiftNIO https://github.com/apple/swift-nio) the framework is based on.
Anyway, it's very early still with launch via Reddit itself only 3 months ago. One of the biggest issues is getting it in front of people without appearing spammy and cold-start on a social platform is also brutal, you need users to get users, and round and round it goes. I may do a Show HN in the future if there's any interest in a real experience using Vapor as a production backend.
Astroturfing is the biggest problem for online forums now. Bots can hide behind residential IPs and AI can generate tonnes of innocuous slop to overwhelm all other content. No human moderation will be able to keep up with it. Anyone building an online forum should think hard about this, I don't think it'll be easy to solve.
I've seen videos of LLM-based automated post generators running on Reddit and it's pretty horrifying. I've also witnessed large subreddits being entirely controlled by bad actors and users having no recourse. I'm definitely not leaving it solely up to human moderation, there are tons of automated detection mechanisms augmenting the human moderation and the system is being built upon every day. I know it won't be easy to solve, I'm keen that somebody should try to tackle this issue, because it's arguably the single biggest scourge of the internet right now and has serious real-world implications, like influencing the outcome of elections. The internet is real-life now, it should be tackled. The landscape is an arms race and there is too much benefit to be had by malign forces to stop trying to shape conversations with bot swarms.
As for residential IPs, I take your point that this complicates things even more. It is very difficult to know accurately which of those are being used as proxies. However, the site has a swiss-cheese model of defence, so if a user passes through one layer, they still come up against all the other layers, so losing one layer is undesirable but still manageable. Again, I cannot claim it to be perfect, but it's working decently so far.
I’m working on an iOS app, One Million Checkmates [1]. It scratches an itch I had of chess puzzles for a long plane ride. This app has a functionally unlimited number of puzzles, all offline.
There was a decent amount of work involved in getting the download size reasonable since we need to store all valid moves in a position. There are puzzles with over 40 million valid move sequences, so I had to aggressively prune and compress the move trees.
In reaction to recent AUR supply chain attacks, I am working on two small tools to try to help address the issue for myself.
First, `aurgate`, a small AUR helper which is more barebones than alternatives but provides a "full diff" workflow. The idea is to make upgrades feel like a "full diff review" and also support graphical tools like meld or the vs code diff viewer.
Second, `flatgate`. This tool is inspired by LittleSnitch and Flatseal. Here the idea is to "default deny" all permissions of newly installed flatpaks and allow/whitelist per invocation (where possible) or on first use.
1. Kinetic Merge - it's a CLI tool for merging in Git repositories. What it gives over and above the core Git merge is the ability to merge through the motion of code from one location to another. Yes, Git can track file-renames and merge through them, but it doesn't follow code moving around inside a file, or a file being split into two or more pieces, or a new file accumulating code that used to live in several files. Essentially, the sort of thing you get with a lot of refactorings or automated code tidy-ups.
I've been at this since 2023; it was a long-standing itch I had to scratch since back in the early 2010s, finally got some time to work on it. Now in its 57th release, GitHub tells me!
It's written in Scala and packaged up as a standalone executable - needs a JVM >= 17 to run it on Linux / Windows / OSX.
2. Americium - this is a mixed Java / Scala framework for folk who want to write property-based or generally parameterised tests, but:
a) want the failing tests to shrink automatically without writing custom shrinkage logic and
b) don't want to have the test structure and expectations DSL dictated to them by the framework.
Its job is to serve up test data into your flavour of Java or Scala test, look for an exception from the test and get shrinking. The rest is up to you.
There is a separately shipped artifact that plugs into JUnit5 / JUnit6 for a tighter integration, including test replay via IntelliJ or Visual Studio or whatnot, but that's an optional extra.
I've worked on this since 2020, now hitting its 52nd release. I use it for my other projects, and I know of a couple of corporate teams that use it because I evangelised it to them, but ironically, I'm only just getting round to using it for the problem that motivated me to write it in the first place.
Been working on optimizing CLIs for cheap agent use and figuring out how to build integrated agentic features that aren’t a full chat interface. Agent UX optimization is kind of fun! Much more testable than human UX, though it’ll be interesting to see how much generalizes across model families.
Been doing this to improve/simplify the grammar for Trilogy[1], a streamlined SQL language - I’ve been planning a redo of one feature and it’s nice to be able to rapidly get feedback on various syntax success rates. Also been particularly useful to optimize error messages, which should help people too.
I just (vibe) coded up a little block training app for skateboarding. I noticed that the vast majority of skaters don't land anything consistently and just huck their skateboard around. Unlike in other sports where people follow some sort of progression most skaters never learn fundamentals or practice in a logical way. This is my solution to that using modern block training, progression gates, and tracking methods. This is still a tiny MVP:
I’ve been considering new features on Book Bounce for my use cases. I’m pretty hesitant to start anything new on it while I’m waiting for approval for Google Play…
In the mean time, I’m working on a recipe application I’ve had countless false starts on. It’s centered around iterations and version on recipes, tracking changes to ingredients and directions to build new a new recipe from an existing one.
I’m starting with a go Bubbletea tui this time and I’ve been having a lot of fun with it compared to the React SPAs I’ve tried before. Not feeling compelled to style anything while working on the UX has been nice.
After working a bunch on logic puzzle Ruly [0] which is now in a steady state and visited daily by a small group of users, I've begun a new puzzle based on the relative positions of cities, towns, landmarks, and points of interest in my native Yorkshire (likely to be followed by other territories).
I'm experimenting with different ways of using Openstreetmap data to make something that tests local knowledge in novel and interesting ways. Working title: Where the Heck? An initial prototype will be ready soon.
I am finishing the latest version of Dolphin Whispers Chat application, an Android app for trying to chat with dolphins at sea. And the new version will probably be adapted to work with some wearable display glasses so that we can see the spectrogram and the chat text from the app and see the dolphins reactions near the boat without moving our head and refocussing, which makes us losing important and fleeting information about the exchanges. Such exchanges are usually very short and we need to focus on it and not be distracted by changing focus. Once we are better at these exchanges, then they should become longer. www.dolphinwhispers.com
Share a single google doc with your agent (w/o oauth mess)
I needed a way to share a single google doc/sheet with my agent
I didn’t want to go through the heavy oauth gcp project so I’m using disposable email addresses as the work around
2. Agents.sh
I get so many cold emails that could be better if I tell the bots how to talk to and reach me. What’s top of mind for me, how I like to be pitched, etc.
So I made a mini platform to put up text/md files. Then added all the perms fun - pw support, expiration, every url has an inbox. Aimed at agents only.
A LIMS and management platform for dairy farms. The industry is locked into a couple of proprietary softwares and data surfaces that don't integrate (eg. cow health and nutrition at the same time), so I'm pulling them together to a postgres schema for proper descriptive and predictive modeling.
So many cool projects you guys are working on. I'm trying to implement a Multimodal Swarm Management simulator, idea is to use agent to process operator intents, form swarm and build a mission for a set of drones and other available assets based on their capabilities. Inspired by my other more practical projects where we are operating large fleet of platforms and current mission planners have very imperative model and so low level.
More speculations are there https://uglydrone.com/posts/052920261.html
- https://pyinfra.com - Python infrastructure management, been picking up pace recently trying to keep on top of PRs!
- https://kanmail.io - always plugging away at Kanmail changes, no one uses it really except me but that’s fine :) new site designed by fable blew my mind
- https://verified.fyi - first side project started initially as a vibe coding experiment, but it’s become quite good at sussing out dodgy websites
I’ve been building a plug-and-play controller to use motorized faders with ESPHome and other microcontrollers easily, called FaderBuddy.
It’s a small board with a ATtiny1616 and motor driver that mounts to the bottom of Behringer MF60T replacement faders and provides an I2C interface for reading the position, moving to a specific spot, and even setting up haptic detents, like a linear version of my SmartKnob project.
Perfect for making an intuitive smart light dimmer switch or a macropad.
Just need to find some time to finish making a proper video about it…
Working hard to finally ship my co-founded product - Edit Square, an online motion graphics editor https://editsquare.com/ - private invites are going out this week, wish me luck!
This has been in the works for many years! The project originally started as web forms driving After Effects templates on a Windows server, and has now evolved to a point where the web technology landscape has matured enough to build a full-on motion graphics editor right in the browser, using WebGPU and WebCodecs.
This week we're working on a modular WASM build to allow others to embed Tritium directly into their own platforms. AI native startup law firms love it.
It's a durable orchestration loop for implementing code with LLMs that forces review and verification gates until the code matches exactly what you asked for.
It's complementary to any existing harness or tools you use, you investigate and plan your work and simply have your agent hand off the implementation to the engine.
You can have Opus 4.8 implementing, GPT 5.5 and DeepSeek reviewing in different roles etc, mix and match however you like.
It also supports sandboxing out of the box, starting with the YC backed Microsandbox.
It's an app that allows you to schedule a wake-up call and get a real call from a friendly person, somewhere in the world. No phone numbers exchanged. All calls happen through VoIP in the app.
I am working on devlens.io , It automatically maps your codebase dependencies and drops precise structural insights directly into your GitHub PRs. No hallucinations, just hard context.
It is an open-source project and I will introduce soon its mcp/cli counterpart so that graphical context and sumaries can be given to LLMs/Agents directly through the mcp integration.
I've been an on off off tabletop wargamer for ~ 9 years and have never been really happy with the options for list building, game tracking etc. Everything was very clunky, slow and disjointed. I came up with a product idea and brand logo but never had time to even touch it until recently.
It's still very early days, but I'm starting to test drive it out and loving it so far. Lots more to do, but would love feedback from anyone that wants to give it a whirl!
Too many things :tm:
From Campaign Management CMS for an organization I'm part of.
To various reverse engineering one offs.
Today I caused thermal runaway on a BLE thermal (sic!) printer. That melted half of its components together before I noticed. The fun fact is you can do that witouth authorizing, as long as printer is turned on "poof".
Now I'm trying to figure out a BT protocol if DJI Power station, so I can read and track its metrics.
I wrote an improved driver'ish for cheap 5G modem recently. I've been on the last 5% stretch for few months lol.
And I started reverse engineering my LandRover OBD/CAN stuff, so I have some data to publish for other hakers.
Playing about with a small side project that's spun out of a need to manage our board game nights better.
Started as a spreadsheet, moved to notion database, now a web app. Idea is groups have collective libraries across members, and planning what to play when is a pain.
Tried to make it easy to get going - take photo of your games shelf and we identify the games there, look them up via the BoardGameGeek API and add the to you library, then you can the pool with others.
I’m working on Hyperplane Eval, a local property-based testing tool for AI agents that automatically discovers behavioral failure regions instead of relying on manually written prompts.
PAX ERP. An AI-assisted ERP for small regulated/job shop manufacturers that have outgrown QuickBooks and can't afford (or take the time) to go through a traditional ERP implementation.
PAX is the easiest ERP to pick up. Our core idea is that ERP should not take weeks of formal training and implementation. We have no formal training, no implementation fees, and are a complete ERP+CRM GAAP accounting system. It's intuitive, well-documented, AI-assisted (never steered), and people can pick it up and start using it well with no questions to our team.
Building Clawrium (https://github.com/ric03uec/clawrium), a CLI to orchestrate a fleet of autonomous agents(like openclaw, hermes etc) on multiple physical hosts.
As I started running agents on my home network I needed an easy way to maintain them without sshing every every time. I built clawrium as a way to centralize config management, secrets, templates and llm providers. Think of it like a control plane similar to kubectl.
screen.cam records your Mac and turns it into a polished video. Smart zooms follow your cursor. Filler words come out automatically. AI-assisted YouTube uploads.
Building a map guessing game where you're given a map with the labels/axis redacted, and then you have to guess what it's a map of.
e.g. the map would be average height by country, but you would just get a map where countries like The Netherlands were the darkest, and then you'd have to try and figure out that it's average height!
The hinting system for it is a bit work in progress (trying to tune the difficulty and feedback from hints)
Running our Web Dev and IT Consulting business with a focus on hand written, non-AI services. The point isnt to stick it to AI or because we hate LLM's, the point is to focus on efficiency, modularity, and make sure our clients projects are as efficent, speedy, well documented, and as de-bloated as possible. We run on our own local bare metal and try to tailor every aspect of what goes into hosting a site by focusing on speed and security as priority metrics above all else. https://opacitytech.com
I'm currently writing up what is the last major chapter, which introduces capability-passing as an architecture, and builds a simple TUI framework using it. Fun stuff!
I'm a few months away from launching the book, but the early feedback is very positive. I find writing enjoyable but also, damn, do I need to get this book finished. :-)
I am currently working on a platform for authors to write nursery and kindergarten books for children. It’s pretty much in alpha stage. https://storybench.app
Actively working on https://thatbook.club (https://thatbookclub.com). An idea I had for me and my friends, and which we have been using for the last 2 years privately. Just made it open for others to join in.
Similar to goodreads and other book clubs, but focuses on making logging pages and statistics around your reading more fun. Nudging friends when logging pages is the main motor behind this.
Trying to polish a bunch of my projects I've worked on over the years but never had the cojones to release to the wider world:
Hallways (https://hallways.lonnycorp.com) - a web browser for 3D spaces, where instead of hyperlinks you have portals that you can seamlessly walk through
LonnyMQ (https://lonnymq.lonnycorp.com) - a performant, production-ready TS PostgreSQL message queue library and accompanying blog post that walks through its design (of which I'm quite proud of)
It is currently in review with Apple and will be coming to the iPad and iPhone. This is an iPad-first dungeons & dragons app focused on empowering dungeon master's as they manage their campaign. inspired by my first DM in my first campaign with friends.
I’m working on a novel (toy scale) kind of LM that is explicitly interpretable and programmable. In that it learns to predict words from text and you can directly see what it learned and teach it new things without retraining.
I needed to get customers for Hyperclast [1], but I keep putting off GTM (go to market) tasks. I'd rather be building, you know. So I created https://tractionbeast.com/ as a tool for myself. It gives me bite-sized GTM tasks every day. I just review and do them. This completely removes the inertia for me! My other founder-friends like it too so I turned it into a product.
Currently, for 27 podcasts, the episodes are fetched the day they are released and are summarized in nested bullet points.
I still don't know if I should just keep adding more and more podcasts or if I should turn it into a real set of tools where users could, among other things, enter the link of a podcast episode and get it turned into bullet points.
NextBunny is a visual development platform for product builders.One system to go from idea → design → production. No Handoffs. No tool switching. Full control.Perfect for Next.js and React apps.
Modern and affordable Figma,Framer alternative but without hype or lock in.
Working on a brand-new version of my free project management tool, Post Haste. It’s a tool for creating new projects from templates where you set the initial folder structure and project settings, as well as enforcing naming conventions. It was initially created for video editors but you can use it in any industry.
It’s a complete redesign from scratch that combines Mac and Windows into a single codebase via Dioxus (right now they’re two completely separate codebases).
Still working on https://fabric.shivan.dev/ - its a local-first app which lets you review markdown, answer Q&As and review code with your agents. Still working out a few bugs as I use it in my workflow. Also added a CLI.
Not sure if I should be monetising this in anyway - maybe through a cloud sync feature. But it's useful enough for me right now.
Been working on an application to replace the app i got from when i had a personal trainer. I wanted to be able to edit my own and my wifes workouts, nutrition etc without being locked in and buying more sessions.
So last 1.5 years i slowly built a web admin + ios app that has all the same functionality but with the concept of coaching yourself or others. Got some interest from coworkers and friends so trying to make it into a saas and launch after summer.
I'm working on an easy-to-embed typed language called Ekto. I am taking a lot of inspiration from Koka and aiming to support full multi-shot delimited continuations all while keeping the virtual machine deeply predictable from the host side.
I'm also rebuilding an integrated task/knowledge/publication system I'd previously built atop Gemini's Gemtext format. While I loved the simplicity, I've discovered that there are lots of burrs in that design, especially on the publication side, which I'd be able to lift by using a more fully featured document format like Djot.
Cooking a local AI version of PDF Reflow to show PDFs on mobile and keep all the look and feel (font, formulas, pictures, tables) yet formatted for a smaller screen.
It’s using a local YOLO detector trained specifically on detection pdf page regions.
The old version works and has many users who love it to read scientific papers, but its heuristics based and was in my opinion failing on edge cases that this new AI approach solves.
I'm working on a multiplayer stock trading game that was inspired by all my favorite board games. https://www.spellfolio.com/
It's a web-based game for 1-8 players, features a tutorial and bots, plays like a board game, and operates with economy, bluffing, forward-planning, risk-taking, course-correcting mechanics.
Play as an amateur psychic navigating a fictional stock market. Receive premonitions, call in your wizard friend, navigate dividends & earnings releases, and chase the glamorous annual investor awards.
Still working on my Dungeons and Dragons combat tracker. It has gained a few users by now (I "launched" it last month) and I am adding features here and there. I think now the next major hurdle is marketing which I am not really good at. I post to reddit and other forums and can get some eyes on the project like that but it is slow going. I think next would be a few youtube videos/shorts explaining the features. - https://topoftheround.com
I'm build open source : Sovereign AI Infra, Deployed in Minutes.
Deliver Private AI in your cloud organization. Everything in full control.
The idea is simple: Its handle of the complexity for AIOps infra like GPU VM provisioning, NVIDIA driver setup, Docker setup, model download, and launching the inference server. User can run any OSS and AI tools inside their cloud.
Currently in beta, working out some pipeline optimizations. Looking for people to test! Feel free to try it out, join the discord, etc. Looking for feedback on the experience, reliability, etc.
The goal is for folks to be able to tune their own pipelines, right now I am working on adding more API params/knobs. Looking to build a good capture guide too, since most folks struggle with capture IMO
Putting finishing touches on an open source multi sig solution to authenticate digital artifact, aiming to increase security of the software supply chain. It's open source, completely self hostable, incl internally, support air gapped signers, fully auditable (data store is a puglic git repo). It's an alternative to sigstore, making different decision.
Hi HN! I built aiexpo.app — a
directory of 1,600+ AI tools across
70+ categories.
I started it 2 months ago because
I was frustrated searching for AI
tools across dozens of different
sites. Everything is in one place:
compare tools, filter by category,
read reviews, find free alternatives.
Covers everything from AI chatbots,
image generators, coding tools,
video tools, to AI agents.
Updated daily as new tools launch.
Happy to answer any questions about
how I built it or what's in there!
I am working on my project swarmy, making data analysis of Starcraft 2 replays easily available for gamers/casters, all in rust, using nom to parse replay binaries and map data, exporting to apache arrow snapshots to analyze with polars, managing the data flow via tauri, exposing the aggregations/controls via leptos, using rerun to navigate replay timeline, bevy to deep dive through the maps and provide "geo" stats, this weekend started playing with bevy skein to manage assets/materials via blender.
Improving my focus. Using less AI at work and reading more. Less screen time and more physical things. Spending a lot of time with friends and being outdoors, long distance running and finding more meaning in life
I learned to program with KidSIM and later Stagecast Creator, a spin-off of Apple's Advanced Technologies Research Group in the 90s. I'm re-creating it so a new generation can learn the fundamentals of object-oriented programming the same way I did. I've been working with Dave Canfield Smith (one of the original authors and also inventor of the icon ) and it's been a blast to bring back my earliest memories of programming. All open-source and free of course.
- https://namebrewery.com: An MCP for looking up domain name availability. Brainstorming names within the LLM has been great and now I can have it do the registrar look ups from within the LLM too.
- https://altitag.com: A real estate photographer can upload a drone photo and get points of interest pins overlaid on the photo using EXIF data. The annotations help provide some nice neighborhood context without needing to open up Photoshop.
Mainly https://lumenfall.ai, which is OpenRouter for media models, with mock generations for testing and judge models for production model performance monitoring. We also have our own arena where we benchmark image, video and svg models.
As a side project I‘m building a multi agent harness that works across desktop and mobile and solves the issue of drowning in too many agent sessions for my own workflow. Hopefully I’ll open source it soon.
Reach out if you’d like to beta test it. (Email in my profile)
Nothing too "huge" or "notable" actually. Just things that I need. Wanted a good Obsidian -> Astro blog/notes pipeline since Astro doesn't understand Obsidian markdown syntax, wrapping my head around ASTs for that. Working on a neovim extension to help with my competitive programming hobby, so that I can just go ":CSES 1068"/":CF 1802B" and solve the problem/verify against sample cases locally.
* Robotics Hello World: Objective is to implement ACT model to train my arm robot on simple pick-and-place tasks. Leaning heavily on HuggingFace's LeRobot library, but stopping short of using their model implementation and training loop. https://github.com/avilay/learn-robotics
* Designing a new programming language: This is when I want to escape the annoyances of coding in Python and start daydreaming about a new language :-) https://github.com/avilay/kulfi
I'm working on adding Sega 32X support to BlastEm [0], the Genesis/Mega Drive (as well as some related Sega systems these days) emulator. I've gotten most games working on this point, though still have some bugs to track down. Also want to increase timing accuracy (even if its not needed for games, it's helpful for homebrew development) and improve perfomance.
- attempting to vibe-engineer a new JS engine to replace the dying Duktape (almost done!)
- native library to build TUI apps without the 20-60MB bloat of node/bun/go
- terminal coding agent harness focused on orchestration/loops
- a small scripting language that looks like JSX but has signals and render optimizations built in
- open-source software and hardware smart doorbell for a community space
- teaching AI how to write games for the Nintendo Wii
- designing an arcade cabinet
All of this over the past 4-5 months. AI is allowing me to deploy my short attention span very effectively! This is more than all I’ve accomplished in the past five years.
Working on goblin, a scripting language that compiles to Go.
The idea: dynamic + minimal syntax for scripting, but you get a single static binary and Go's concurrency primitives (goroutines/channels) for free. No runtime to ship, easy to deploy anywhere.
Intentionally few features, the goal is small and scriptable. Someone with programming experience should be able to pick it up in half an hour.
I'm working on a Cowork/Codex plugin for reading and manipulating docx files. It uses 2-5x fewer tokens compared to the Anthropic's docx skill and is much faster.
The main target users are lawyers who redlines and drafts legal documents, and they almost always use docx.
It can be used together with Claude For Legal; The combination is pretty magical.
Aside from that, I've launched a new tool that tries to promote Solar panels. The UK has some of the most expensive energy in the world, so I've been trying to let homeowners and building managers understand if their building's are suitable.
Uses some APIs all plugged together - including the DEFRA datasets for DSM (LiDAR from planes).
I'm working on https://plukio.com. A lightweight alternative to Etsy built in Elixir. I saw a lot of people on the Internet (and a couple of people in real life) complaining about how there really is no equivalent for "old Etsy" and how a lot of people who sell handmade pottery and jewelry have turned to custom websites and Instagram.
I have a mailing list for when I launch and some local makers in Portland are interested so I'm hopeful.
I'm continuing to work on my fishing-log app: https://buckaros.com/ (It's in Serbian, at least for now). I recently added an option to attach images to fishing logs, locations, and equipment using Cloudflare's R2. Now I've started working on adding teams support, so that you can chat with your friends and see their catches and locations.
A platform that offers a simple deploy path for internal tools in your own infra.
Basically, build anything using your agent of choice (Claude Code, Codex, etc) and get it live in your company's infra without having to provision anything yourself / loop in a DevOps person.
App goes behind company auth (e.g. SSO), and everything's handled for you: custom domains, governed storage APIs, observability, analytics, role-based access control, etc.
an array language. now I'm working on the tokens->three address code->bytecode translation.
I'm hoping to get that done this week, then start implementing the more important builtins&library functions. you'd be surprised how many functions you can bootstrap just by implementing grade/argsort.
for example:
// C++ (naive version, sorry)
vector<int> bin(vector<int>& x, vector<int>& y) {
vector<int> r;
for (int a:x) r.push_back(lower_bound(y.begin(),y.end(),a) - y.begin())
return r;
}
# Jet
ord<<{x asc asc} # double grade idiom
bin<<{y,x ord drop len[y]-ord[x]-1}
or course this is not at all apples to apples, though it works to show the difference in possible approaches. in C++ I'm just turning an already implemented binsearch into something useable for arrays, and in jet I'm doing some weird array tricks to implement it from scratch using grade up
(asc).
moreover, the C++ solution is O(m*log(n)) and jet is O(m+n) (though with a large constant factor) - but of course we can do much better once I implement it as a real builtin
I thought this might be interesting - but I'm on PC and there are no quick ways to pop on that site and see the app in action. Like no screenshots or anything? So I left and likely will never be back. Always good to have some quick screenshots/gifs of apps in action or people bounce on your landing/sales page never to be seen again.
very interesting. I'd echo the comment by another user that the website needs to 'show' what the app UI is like.
The marketing aspect of the app would be key - the app store is crowded for convoy tracker apps - but hardly anyone is framing the "friends" angle. Good luck!
I've been thinking about and working on a solution to automatically resume a Claude code session in the same terminal when my quota resumes. I hate waking up and typing "please continue"
Now we’re working on effective utopianism and specifically on physicalized computational ethics to intrinsically align all AI agents: https://effectiveutopia.org
TUI based interface to search in your files very quickly. I created it from the need to have an equivalent of voidtool's Everything on Linux. It's a bit different though because it's keyboard based. You define zones where you search for files most of the time, and you can manage previous files history.
Then there are actions you can perform on each file/folder.
The biggest problem with Duolingo is not just the spaced repetition but the entire curriculum is random, imprecise and felt like slop long before LLMs (with the exception of stories I guess). By random I mean it's just like reading a series of disconnected sentences with some common features. There's no anchor.
For Spanish for example, compared to spanishdict.com course which is a similar format but has a defined length and doesn't encourage you to continue indefinitely, is much more precise, follows a practical story arc - introducing yourself at school, how did you get to school, going on vacation with family etc etc. It jumps from location to location each unit and explains regional differences in grammar/vocab.
I’m building https://design.withfudge.com, a Prolog-backed design search engine that lets designers/agents query structured design knowledge from real websites. It uses data from my other startup, https://fontofweb.com, to help designers find concrete inspiration e.g fonts, colors, layouts, screenshots, and patterns, so they can make better design decisions.
Still working on stelae.eu (private WP editor -> static deploy: more secure, faster, cheaper). Its pretty solid already, only working on minor things. The main issue is that I think that I have a real cool product (maybe a bit boring, but in a good way) with good values (anti lock-in, privacy respecting, EU centric, fair pricing, no VC money -> sustainable business approach) but I can't reach the people that would love to use it. So thats what I'm really working on: trying to be more visible.
I've been building a retirement income optimizer much like you see financial analysts use to optimize different sources of income to minimize taxes during retirement and ensure you don't run out of money. It also runs Monte Carlo simulations based on market returns and spending going forward to predict your chances of not meeting your goals. Just writing it for myself as most applications along this line are all proprietary and accessible through financial advisors only.
I'm building a plugin for Ghidra called Specter that aims to bring semi-deterministic agent workflows to Ghidra. It adds a terminal like interface to Ghidra's code browser where you can chat or run DSL queries.
The project is currently 100% vibe coded with codex\gpt-5.5, but after running some experiments, I'm working on replacing some of the vibe coded SQL engine with Apache Calcite.
I'm working on a durable ECS system, mostly for games, though generally useful. It's to exercise a storage engine I have been building with Git like properties.
Should be able to turn the computer off at the mains half way through, then restart and instantly carry on without any loading phase as if nothing had happened.
Well that's the dream.
Now the lower layers work I'm mapping out the actual ECS part and what the API will be like.
I'm quite enjoying it and it's a really fun challenge.
Currently working on rezgen.app which is an resume generator that helps to generate ATS optimized resumes per job posting parsed. It helps so that you can quickly crank out many resumes that all follow the same formatting rules and design. This removes the need to utilize word or another software for ensuring the resume always comes out formatted the same.
Still working on Hopp, an oss pair programming app. A few months ago we ported part of the frontend in rust, to work around the webrtc limitations imposed by webkit (Hopp is written in tauri), which caused some stability issues. Now the app is more stable again but we are still making improvements and fixes.
I've been getting tired of implementing webhooks and sync the same old way.
https://webpoke.sudoscience.dev/ seems simpler.
I did a poc using s2.dev and val.town [1] and am using the general idea to explore with TLA+ to see how it would model it to falsify the claims.
Thought it’d be a short concept to get from start to finish but the things you need to implement and plan for in a video game can be near infinite and decision paralysis is a real problem for me.
ive been getting claude to reverse engineer my raybans glasses case, so i can figure out a 3d printed insert to put in thats less likely to break.
in the process, figuring out some tricks for getting opus to work with 3d a bit better
two tricks ive found is to:
1. get claude to present all the orientations to you, then pick which one after
2. convert 3d problems to 2d ones - get it to draw streamlines describing the geometry, rather than trying to look at the whole thing in 3d
fable was a fair bit better at working in 3d than opus is. well, opus mostly isnt
I'm working on https://hallucinate.site - an MMO Rave - doing little things every day and trying to improve experience for everyone. We've had some spikes of users over the past two weeks but it's still very low. Thinking of ways to make it more engaging so that people return for more things other than the music.
Over the last year or so I arrived at a (sort of) MQTT semantic broker that facilitates an actor architecture. It supports federation (including transitive, so proxies "just work"(TM)), transparent outbound buffering with disk overflow and encryption with the noise protocol. Building apps on top of it is a joy. Rust.
edit: ah, yes also a broker controlled component manager that can start, stop, monitor services over the mentioned broker. This is the carpet that brings the room together.
Still plugging away on SourceMinder (https://github.com/ebcode/SourceMinder). I know, I know, everyone and their brother is working on token-saving schemes for LLMs. But I’ve found it to be useful even without the LLM. I’m working on a proper website for it now where you can try it out in the browser (wasm port) — try before you don’t buy (it’s GPL). Feedback welcome.
I am working on a iOS memory of our days. Inregrates with photos, motion, music, reminders, calendar, location visits, fitness, health, sleep provides detection of drives, filtering of photos to remove near duplicates, voice transcription for journalling including carplay,… You can check it out on https://retrography.app, I am looking for free Testflight users.
Still working on my daily word association game 'Noun Sense'. Had quite some people from the UK complaining that they were scoring lower with the British variations of words like colour or behaviour. Going to rerun the data crunching and combine the most common ones so the scores will be more "fair"
Working on a print-and-play football/soccer game that uses spare World Cup stickers as the player cards.
I've been balancing ~800 player cards and running several simulations to balance the cards. It's been an interesting mix of my hobbies such as football, game design, many spreadsheets and CSVs, and a bit of code.
Been working on making it much easier for application deployments to get access to a isolated database/schema. The usual pattern currently is to assume that each app creates a new database, which ignores the backups, monitoring etc required for each database. Implemented support for Postgres and MySQL.
Working on a proactive AI agents that read your calendar and give you pertinent advices on what you should do. For example you have a flight in 2 weeks, tell you what to pack. When you arrive , tells you the best way to get to the city.
You have your mum's birthday, give you a heads up on buying a gift or booking a restaurant.
Still iterating through refinement and features. It's built on Rust + Tauri with a React frontend, in case anyone is curious.
I've created various open-source and commercial tools in the multimedia space over the last 10+ years and wanted to put it all together into something more premium.
VERDURE is a creative sandbox where you grow and shape plants through trimming and pruning. You can also unlock a 'recipe panel' to further customize them and build a entire collection of your creations. I like to try and recreate real plant designs with it. It is a bit unusual.
Filing an 'actually useful' defensive patent suite, finalizing investor-facing demos, and raising for autonomous manufacturing of a 100% autonomous food distribution play (the cooking direct from fresh ingredients, packaging, cutlery provisioning, and optional drone delivery all require zero humans) https://infinite-food.com/ (capital welcome, 100x expected)
Any fans of Divvy/window management software? I'm working on a replacement, its near production level, open to any thoughts/suggestions. for apple silicone.
I can't say what the app does specifically, but I can talk about the technical content and tool chain. It incorporates machine vision to detect human movement. It can connect via video call to other instances of the app. It's implemented mostly in Flutter/Dart. It has some things it does on Android exclusively, for reasons. Most recently I've been adding Android AppFunctions so I'm ready for the on device agents in Android 17.
A chat platform for founders, creators, and small teams to talk directly to their users! No more email or ticket queues. Build a real community around what you make.
I built this because I've seen firsthand how community Discords just don't scale for support or community-driven product growth.
I'm working on https://soonpatch.com - to paste a slack report message about your code (bug/improvement) in Claude Code and get the fix in the proper repo/worktree right away (you can call it in any CC instance and it'll find the way, no need to navigate through your directories manually)
I'm working on https://fabritorio.dev currently actively dogfooding in preparation for an official Show HN.
It's a visual way of setting up AI agents, so that you can have a quick overview over your automated workflows. Understanding where it might be wrong, as opposed to a personal AI assistant which can be a bit of a blackbox.
It’s for the boring pdf jobs every SaaS eventually gets: invoices, reports, certificates, contracts, labels, that kind of thing. You send html, a url, or a template with JSON data, and get a PDF back.
Last week we shipped the Node SDK. Right now I’m working on the Python SDK and tightening up the docs
Currently working on HN Alerts — a simple free site I made to alert me (via email) to trending stories on Hacker News.
It sends me an email once a story hits a certain number of upvotes per minute, so it's useful for keeping track of breaking news.
It'll also soon allow you to get alerted to specific words or phrases in titles. (I have one set up so the monthly hiring threads notify me as soon as they appear.)
It checks every 5 minutes, and if more than one story happens to meet the criteria during that 5 minute bucket then it'll put them into one email (so the "hiring" checks appear in one email). But in reality because it's rare that 2 stories will trend within the same 5 minute bucket it ends up being one email per story.
I'm working on my self-host TTS cli application for turning articles into spoken audio which I can stream from my PC to mobile device when I'm out and about.
Thinking about adding some things like queuing RSS feed items to be converted to audio and a feature for being able to do the conversion from my phone.
I'm beginning to build/host a series of own-use, self-hostable products for personal benefit, starting with an LLM chat for me & my wife, a photo manager, our personal calendar, "whitelisted" youtube app for kids in our home, investment tracking, story/music playlist for our kids, and so on. Plan is to run and maintain our own ecosystem of essential products for our family.
I made a little game about popping animals (mankind’s oldest enemy?) and when you fail, a seagull is sick. The animals you pop go into your menagerie so they are ok (they also aren’t real). Right now it has footballs and such to play along with a current tournament but don’t mention the real name or Apple will reject it again. See: https://animalpopper.com
Thank you, the Android version should be out imminently but Google takes 2 weeks to review and then rejects it because I implied “the news” had endorsed it. Fingers crossed early in the week!
Pagecord! A personal website and blog... that you'll actually keep updated.
It's an all-in-one, open source blogging/site analytics/newsletter platform that takes privacy seriously and is priced affordably (plus a free plan, obvs). Would love your feedback if you have a few mins to spare.
I'm making https://pond.li to try and make our personal archives of text and other media we engage with more available to the present. It's an interesting design space at least, partly because it requires taking a stance on what meaningful/cognitive agency preserving human-LLM interaction looks like
For memory and continuity, I am working on eachmind. Eachmind gives each agent its own memory — privately encoded, individually shaped — while defining a protocol for what gets selectively shared, when, and how.
I'm working on Glyph, Its a is a statically typed functional language in the ML family.
Surface syntax is mostly SML-1997-ish, but underneath it's a different thing: simple-sub type inference, algebraic effects, modular implicits, and Perceus-style reference counting instead of a tracing GC.
The compiler is currently a Rust frontend -> Zig codegen -> native binary pipeline.
I'll be posting a Show HN soon, but the idea is to let the communities around GitHub repos fund the specific issues they care about while giving the maintainers of said repos agents of their choice to work on them (that they control entirely).
Working on fully 3gpp compliant full telecoms core network supporting 2g through 5g, targeting MVNEs/MVNOs, check out our website at https://mcore.systems
Started from scratch and we are now fully interconnected with 2 MNOs and in production. With Voice, Data, SMS, USSD and other VAS working for our first client.
I continue to work on my monitor+launcher for livestreams. It uses Streamlink that is a magnificent piece of work but has no UI. Anyway I wanted something that stays out of the way and notify me (I love system tray apps). Does it make any sense?
Working on my programming language. Goal is to perfect the interpreter's code embedding mechanism. I'm adding adding features to the language until it can self-host an ELF patcher, then I'll rewrite the ELF patcher I wrote in C in my language with a lot of enhancements.
I'm also hardening my development virtual machine system. Properly firewalling it so that it can reach WAN but not the host or the LAN.
Trying to write a formally verified simplified (1D) implementation of Ruckig, more to learn the tools than for the result, although I want that too. Some fun challenges with numeric stability (using the big hammer of arbitrary precision to address that for now), etc. Still don’t have a real path to bridge correctness arguments through a formalization of Sturm’s theorem or similar, accepting it as an axiom for now.
To gain more experience with Rust I'm implementing an interpreter for a Lisp-like language in it. As an additional challenge I've committed myself to record the entire development process and put it on YouTube. https://github.com/ema-fox/amber
A new major version of a web server that would be easier to debug, not just easy to setup. Because I think ease of setup without ease of debugging is a hyperfocus trap that ends up exhausting operators.
If you're not aware of "sync rights", it's probably worth reading up on given your interests. There is an entire specialization of music copyright law focused solely on synchronization of music to visuals. The good news is that studios almost never obtain this set of rights to the music they publish (because historically there wasn't enough money in it to justify negotiating for them).
Thank you for taking the time to say that. I really appreciate it.
When YouTube was new, a guy named JT Helms made that top one (Once Upon a Time in the West cut to Arcade Fire) and when Bruce Springsteen was asked if he liked anything on YouTube, he said that. And it made me happy because it was my favorite too. And I thought we were on the cusp of something like a new art form.
I still think that. I'd like to see short films shot to music as well.
It started out as a project to try Fable. It wrote a lot of the code and I am learning as I go. I am still questioning some of the design choices but so far it is working. I do want to improve it, so any feedback is welcome.
I built a multi-agent framework and coding harness that I'm using as my primary coding tool now, mostly with DeepSeek and GLM. I've been having a lot of fun working on it and improving it in my spare time. I'm thinking about open-sourcing it but right now the deployment and sandboxing model is fairly dependent on nix.
Implementing a solver/optimizer for the Minizinc challenge in Rust! It's very fun, and maybe next year I will even try and put it into the competition properly. As well, I am working on tracking down the history of Sudoku prior to Wayne Gould's popularization of it in the 2000's, and I have found some really interesting postings on Japanese forums from the 90's about the game.
I will soon! https://threeemojis.substack.com/ just downloaded digithunt (first sudoku generation program I can find evidence of, from 1989) and was playing it some last night. Had Claude decompile it and it was interesting to see how it generates sudokus.
Hi! One of the founders of Convert3D (https://convert3d.org/), client side conversion of 3D formats. These days having fun with adding more and more formats both export and import! Looking for relevant formats and tech to keep expanding the site. Would love to get some feedback!
It takes your instructions, write a versioned spec, then generates a hybrid workflow of code+LLM calls and protects it with tests/evals
The result is that the agents run much faster (90% of it is code), cheaper (LLM steps are scoped tightly and uses smaller models) and reliably (specs get turned into coded state-machine)
Focusing on sharing more on my blog https://so.long.thanks.fish after having a flood of HN views last month on a post
Recently made a stargazing app on Apple Watch, vanity address miner, playing with gameboy roms, and have been making and testing a social photo game that I’ll hopefully make public next month as a PWA
Coming soon is a full automated training system to "certify" people to time events.
It'll spin up a VM with our timing software and an emulator of the hardware of your chosing and you kind of play a game to get certified (you deal with real radio traffic, real world like scenarios where shit goes wrong)... This way we don't have to train people AT events from zero.
It let's developer do test planning and testing automation using their coding agents. The records of the testing sessions are then shareable and can be added to PRs, giving the reviewers visibility into how the feature works, what scenarios are handled and tested and what might have been missed.
https://raizensoft.com - Game development tutorials and resources for code-centric frameworks (libGDX, LWJGL, MonoGame, etc). All articles are written by me and I've been running the site for 10 months to share my passion and technical knowledge. 200+ articles so far and I'm planning to add more.
My first video game! It's a 3D First Person Puzzle game where Medusa turns you to stone, but your statue remains when you respawn - and you use this to solve the puzzles in the game
How much of the code do you think is written by AI?
Just curious as I do video game development and just recently started heavily using opencode agentic development with the Flash models (instead of essentially using zero AI assistance before). I actually really like the workflow and find it helps speed things up a hair and in general allow faster testing/tooling builds/etc. which are super helpful to make a game feel really good.
Kind of curious how other people are using agentic code tools for game dev!
In general the coding aspect of creating this game is very minor compared to the other aspects. I'd say around 5% of my time went to programming even before AI was a thing. Now with AI it's even less.
I'd say around 10-20% of the code is AI right now. I'm mostly past the heavy programming stuff (which I mostly did before AI was as good as it is today).
I do use AI a lot to create custom tool windows in Unity and to solve bugs in 3rd party packages and libraries, it's very helpful there.
Got a donated 6x18 surface grinder with hydraulic x/y autofeed up and running at our Portland hacker space, but we have no floor space for it. I have lathe and mill hobby experience but going from knowing nothing about surface grinders to getting one operational and knowing how to use it was rewarding. There was alot of deep, ancient knowledge to excavate.
A framework to make robotics accessible and easy for everyone (ML engineers/firmware engineers/vibe coder/people with no technical knowledge) where all the stacks have clear separation so every speciality can focus on what they do best.
Working with some friends to bring humanity back to hiring through conversation: https://lumeirjobs.com
Our vision is to replace resumes with a richer, holistic interpretation of a person's achievements by allowing them to talk about their experience and using that as a base for how they are represented.
Audion - a scripting language that is very fun to write and lets you make interactive music, installations, generative compositions etc https://github.com/audion-lang/audion using supercollider or any daw and hardware. AI picks it up easy so Agentic coding in Audion works very well too.
Working on a cross platform podcast app. Server client but with full* offline support. Written with Dioxus + Axum and targets web and mobile. Hopping to get most of the features of antenna pod and a less bugs weirdness than Podverse (currently using iOS). Hoping to to release the code / deploy to the App Store once I dog food it a bit more.
I am working on automated irrigation and fertigation system where remotely we can turn on of the solenoid valve to drip/flood irrigate crops in India. I am using LORA protocol for communication medium between different sensor and main unit. I am still researching on this. I am commenting as I will add more when I develop the prototype
Lately i have been working on creator focussed tool, essentially delivering seamless storage across all of their drives, auto curated profiles, offline backups and full encryption works across web & desktop with mobile as thin client
I’ve been plugging away at my running coach style app, powered by the original idea of training for a trail race while living in a flat area with no easy access to natural climbing that has evolved into a fully functional plan generator: https://runcoach.fly.dev
It works well for me so far and I’m pretty happy with it!
I'm working on Fluxmail, an AI-native email app for people who get a lot of email. It has an AI agent, automatic prioritization and categorization, automatic follow-up reminders, drafting with AI, and a bunch of other stuff.
There's a couple of other ideas I'm integrating right now, like a kanban view for your emails
I built an iOS app so I could have a widget to keep track of the San Diego Padre's season record and the division leaderboard. Crazy the official MLB app doesn't offer something. So I made my own.
I’m working on Kern, a small, git native, make and unix inspired llm workflow.
Modules are simply folders, and the tool just reads from stdio and outputs to stdout. Runs are stored in simple text files with all the info of inputs, outputs and other metadata.
Working on Margin Points (https://www.marginpoints.com/): a daily essay series on business and tech. Already over 80 essays in. I'm playing around with a daily live call-in show for readers who want to discuss ideas while the essays are rough drafts and help shape the thinking.
It's a fast code inspector for agents so that you can easily verify changes before they end up on GitHub and also quickly move around the codebase to keep its shape in your head (to make sure your prompts stay high-signal).
I built a wrestling version of 82-0, https://maineventer.com/. I find these games super fascinating because you can spin them up quickly then they just live without much maintenance outside of existence and algorithm adjustment. elite4sim.com is the Pokemon version.
https://github.com/vipulawl/imageguard - A lightweight Python library that checks whether an image is good enough to feed into an AI pipeline
No image-processing knowledge required. Pass in a path. Get back a decision.
I enjoy creating new benchmarks for LLMs. Lately, combining scientific computing tasks (n-body sim, Monte Carlo, etc) with Apple Metal GPU kernels (evolved through LLMs) led to a curious benchmark I believe: https://github.com/vicgalle/metal-sci-kernels
About half-way through Charles Petzold's Code https://codehiddenlanguage.com/ and continuing studying linear algebra (weak points as a self-taught coder). Tidying up an e2ee, server/client, CRDT-backed, collaborative sync system I'm working on.
Built in AI editor for Wordpress to make it easy to make your site better. Originally just for online newspapers but starting to get interest from Wordpress agencies. First user is free: https://presspass.ai/ai-editor
I was looking at matmul algorithms and their hardware implementations (to start a hardware startup) and I saw that the naive O(n^3) version is what everyone uses.
I’m working on a coding agent that doesn’t have access to the shell. Essentially all it could do is edit and read code, verify and run tests. But due to that limitation I’ve made it target only rust projects for the time being.
I understand the problem you're trying to solve. Have you looked into configuring permissions for harnesses like Claude Code? I believe achieving what you want is possible with something like `.claude/settings.json` via something like:
I've never worked on android/iOS and I know very little about sensors. I'm trying to learn through this experiment. If I can get rid of Strava and some other apps along the way with a simpler core that would be fun.
Developed for my personal use but publicly available and open source. I’m pretty happy with the current state so don’t expect a lot of updates and features, but hopefully others might find it helpful.
I was working on an epub reader specifically for me, losing attention on other readers.i wants something which makes the lesson/content as chunks so that easier to focus. It's called Neubook
It's like the love child of Polytopia and Conductor. As many other agent management platforms/harnesses, Viberia has been building itself, and honestly this has been too much fun to stop.
I have been working on it for a few years. Unfortunately it is currently put on pause, possibly for the entire 2026, but it will launch, and it will be a really useful tool for those that need something like this. I am very hopeful
I'm working on django-logic, a layer in django apps for business logic. However, with all the vibe-coding, I'm not sure if it's still relevant anymore.
I've been working on a little social browser based fishing game called Gooblings which is all about collecting and breeding fish. I'm also planning on a Steam release soon.
The demo is available, no account required if anyone wants to check it out :)
I wanted to be better acquainted with world geography, like us states or countries in Africa. So I build https://popotopo.com (well I say "I" but you know..)
Not really new but options that existed look like 1999
I’m working to finish my JS state library: Valdres. Built to be faster than Jotai/Recoil, batteries included, and more advanced features like scopes, indexes and more. It’s “human built, AI finished”. 1.0 is in beta. https://valdres.dev
I've been wanting to learn deep learning on a deeper level, so I've spent the past month going through Understanding Deep Learning. I've gotten to the chapter on CNNs and right now I'm just implementing a bunch of foundational ML papers (AlexNet, VGG, Word2Vec, etc).
i've been working on a personal finance app. it started out strictly tui (using ink) but i recently added a gui using electron. i still like the tui but i know it's not for everyone.
it's all free, open source, and local-first. you can get a hobbyist tier plaid account and sync your accounts, or use csvs. rules-based categorization, spending trends, FIRE/savings-rate health view, etc.
there's also an mcp server so you can hook it up to claude/cursor and just chat about your finances. and a "canvas" feature where you describe a financial question and an agent builds you a custom calculator for it (e.g. amortization, compounding, what-ifs).
honestly it has all the features i want so i'm not sure what's next. i have a few contributors, always welcoming more.
I’m working on Savanna Guides[0], a mobile app with guides for exploring East Africa’s parks, trails, and campsites. I’m currently working on adding curated safari itineraries.
Thinking a lot about ethnobotany in relation to cannabis and globalization as a research associate working on the Legacy Cannabis Genetics: People and their Plants research project.[0]
I am developing a phone system using Asterisk. In my country, Asterisk is not widely known and is considered a niche piece of software, so my development work is not highly regarded at this time.
I found myself ditching Emacs for iTerm when running TUIs inside tmux on remote hosts. I'm trying to replicate how good tmux is inside iTerm, but it's tough. wip.
I have been experimenting with methods of reading books and creating software for these methods.
For example, I was inspired by the activeness of typelit.io when reading - typing out an entire book helped keep my mind from wandering when reading. But typing the whole book is too tedious. I wrote a few scripts to mirror the words on an epub, which does help with focus but isn't quite good enough.
My current epub reader software I use requires you to press a button to reveal the next word. This has dramatically improved my reading comprehension, prevents inadvertent skimming, and keeps my mind from wandering.
I'm still experimenting but for those who have ADHD or are borderline ADHD, it's quite a revelation - I can finally read without my mind wandering.
building a tool for working with various types of data (for example for organizing workshop jobs, handling orders, managing buildings, ..., just all kinds of data);
I'm working on Kronotop, an open-source, distributed, transactional document database built on FoundationDB, featuring Redis protocol compatibility and a MongoDB-style query language.
I built a website to organise my images and videos from a recent trip to Egypt.
https://deepspaceplace.com/egypt/
It's a must visit destination if you get the chance.
Sun Signal. A simple signal for the sun in your zip code, USA only now though happy to expedite your area if you want, it lets you quickly intuitive the sun through your day, week and month and plan around sun events.
My friend and I have been working on a game: Dozenal. It’s a number puzzle game (with daily challenges) where you have to combine different mathematical operations to fill a grid with “12”s.
This looks like a distant cousin to Square Off, a game I wrote for Prodigy back in the 1980s, which I ported to the web in the 2000s: https://squareoff.kmoser.com/
Working on making my first video game (unannounced, https://gamedepartment.com). We're also spinning out some of our internal playtesting tools into a playtesting service that I think is going to be really cool.
Im currently working solo on the only autopilot agent and thinking partner for android. Its called twent.xyz . Wait. I got more to show you. Im also building signupdoggy.pages.dev which is an API based service that blocks fake signups. Could be temp emails, could be temp phone numbers, we block it all.
I'm working on this simple tool to create minimal and visual pleasing carousels for LinkedIn. The idea came to me after I saw a really nice and minimalist carousel someone posted.
I an working on Bloomberry (https://bloomberry.com), an alternative to Builtwith for finding companies that use a specific b2b product, such as Microsoft 365 (ie, bloomberry.com/data/microsoft365/)
Speeding up C/C++ compiler bootstrapping, starting at a single binary of <1KB. Currently it gets to GCC 4.7 in 2-3 minutes on x86_64 and aarch64: https://github.com/haampie/shpack
Vinyl-Tags: a set of command line tools to facilitate the process of preparing analog recordings for addition to music libraries. Fetch metadata and cover art from Discogs (or generate your own); co-run with Audacity to locate track boundaries efficiently; add the metadata to the audio tracks.
I'm working on a no upload, no account, no server-side preprocessing online viewer for schematics, PCB layouts, 3D boards and BOMs called ECAD Forge -> https://ecadforge.app/
I recently got locked out of Copilot due to exhausted AI credits. I was told had to wait till 1 July for a reset. So i built an alternative, not as great as copilot but it gets the job done. You can check it on the VS Code Marketplace- Freebird AI
Stack based task manager with integrations with GitHub, Linear, and some others to manage and automatically update your immediate todo list, free while in beta (still very early beta)
an open source technical interview platform built for modern interview workflows like takehomes, agent coding sessions, as well as the standard leetcode-style questions.
MathBreakers, Your Limitless Math Universe. It's a math game platform teaching fundamental grade school concepts like Fractions in an immersive 3D world with virtual manipulatives (no equations or worksheets).
Re-reading the Lean Startup to hone our GTM, market validation and growth engine.
I'm making https://trydatapoint.com to make it easier to talk to your target customers and get their feedback within minutes on your product, packaging, ads, etc.
I also would think that client certificates would help better. Then, you do not need API keys, as well as other benefits, such as the end user can create their own passworded private keys if wanted (without ever sending the password to the server), the server cannot steal authentication, it can be used with multiple protocols (not only HTTP(S)), the end user can issue more constrained certificates to themself and others (which can improve security as well as other benefits), it uses DER which is a better format than JSON (in my opinion), the certificate can be revoked, the client can issue a certificate to the server (with restricted permissions, and possibly short validity time) to operate on the client's behalf if wanted, etc.
A X.509 Certificate lifecycle management, and secrets management SaaS designed from the ground up for home labs all the way up to enterprises. Built in PHP/Laravel and Rust.
I’m working on a website where you can paste your NuGet package references and get notified by email if/when a package you’re using is found in a vulnerability database.
Working on a claims automation service for a pet insurance company I work for. Interesting because its backoffice facing but still helps our end users to get their reimbursements faster and makes the feedback loop when we need more documentation from them shorter.
I’m still working on filepond v5. A JavaScript file upload library that supports client side image manipulation, chunked uploading, various file sources, and is procedurally animated.
A DSL for machine learning programs: https://pypie.dev/
Embedded in Python, written like Python, but with static type safety (e.g. it catches tensor shape mismatches at compile time)
I’m working on Starglyphs, a Euler path constellation tracing game. Mostly I just like pretty space things. Hoping to get it out on desktop and mobile apps soon.
Still working on a Reservation System I'm thinking of making FOSS. Not trying to plug it, but it's all I've been working on lately (next to the job that brings in the bread).
It's a weekly email with all the recently published software engineering conference talks. I also pick a few ones that are featured and write short TLDRs. This month, I'll should hit 10,000 readers, fingers crossed!
1. A microcodegen and a deterministic code generator called Archiet which can go from some PRD to production ready solutions in 30 minutes or less and saves time and money.
2. An Open Source Enterprise Architecture Platform called Archie - OSS.
I made Docker not suck for large images. 2-10x faster depending on the operation. I’ve spent the past two weeks burning down the last bits needed to release a BuildKit integration.
Still working on Val CMS: https://val.build
Lots of PRs merged these last weeks and looking forward to getting native tanstack start integration finished.
Attemping to write my own CDCL SAT solver right now. I've experimented in the past with a DP & DPLL SAT solver. I'm currently somewhat mentally stuck on how to create the derived clause after a conflict, but I'll get there :)
Predicting human IQ through someone's social media posts and written responses to text with AI models using all our proprietary IQ data at https://www.riotiq.com
I am working on a linter for EPUBs for issues not covered by EPUBCheck/Ace by DAISY.
The goals: speed, accuracy of diagnostics (e.g. exact problem start/end position in the XHTML), clear issue descriptions including references, utilizing SARIF.
bepr: https://github.com/Aperocky/bepr. This allow shell access to your hosts behind NAT/Wifi with a server over outbound websocket, all by using the exact same package for client + server + user. Minimal footprint at 2mb binary size and wrapped as systemd/launchd service.
Made it to access my setup at home while I travel, without exposing any hosts. I'm aware there are other solutions, but this one you can control end to end at some setup cost.
A CPU only benchmark for typical data-science and ML tasks that I can run on a few different systems that will help me figure out what the next system I should buy is. I have no idea what Apple silicon is like for these tasks.
claude-brief: a live session summariser for Claude Code. It docks a pane right next to your terminal (iTerm2, tmux, kitty, ghostty, Apple Terminal) showing a running summary of what the current session is doing.
I built it after losing track of too many Claude Code terminals running at once - I'd tab between them and have no idea where each one was. Now I can glance at the dock and re-orient in a second.
I’m working on a time series management & analysis tool. The goal is to provide simple ways to work with time series data, including an API and visualisation.
I think that the IoT open source software landscape is missing a simple middleware to abstract the various network providers. I'm trying to fill that gap and hope to author a "show HN" soon about that :-)
AI agent deployments are happening completely automated nowadays, One command and there it is your agent is live.
Recent news about AI agents cost explosions, more than estimated token usage has got me thinking, These are all detected post deployment, pre deployment, are the teams thinking this? Are they even considering who is responsible for what in case of an endless loop being executed that slowly raising the hidden costs.
Been deep diving into visual model architectures. Currently running some small evaluations on an idea around unlabeled mask segmentation that will run efficiently on mobile phone hardware. Looking promising so far!
1) Using Chrome's Isolated Web App technology and the afforded TCPSockets in the browser, I am resurrecting an ancient, windows desktop only, TCP protocol for connecting to * from web applications. All Newspeak, all the time.
2) Re-writing my friends football pool in Newspeak. The Squeak/Seaside version has served him well for more than a decade but I've grown tired of the setup. My VPS server got hacked recently affording the impetus to try another iteration. Storing all the data locally in IndexedDB, using my own Newspeak library for that API.
* While I have no problem being "left behind", I refuse to actively assist others in "getting ahead".
I created a free golf app with advanced visualization none of the paid apps have.
New in the latest release: you can print your personalized Playbook at home (print, cut, fold, staple).
I've been playing on a national amateur golf tour for over ten years.
Before each event, I'd spend hours on Google Earth — figuring out where to aim on every hole and which club to hit. It got very cumbersome very soon.
I wanted a tool that did the spatial reasoning for me. Take my dispersion, the wind, the elevation, the hazards — and just show me the right line on a flyover. Visually, not in numbers.
So I built Golf Playbook (iOS).
Free, no subscription. Built our course data from OpenStreetMap instead of licensing an expensive commercial database. Different cost structure, different price.
Tech: SwiftUI, Apple Foundation Models, OpenStreetMap data. Many nights and weekends.
Always looking for feedback.
A way to access social media content read only without an account, with HTML, RSS/Atom and at some point ActivityPub probably. I will probably post here in a few weeks when PoC will up.
I’m working on my developer portfolio that deeply incorporates the forgejo API, which is where I host my code. It basically gives a personalized dashboard for my personal projects.
I am building a e-com tracker that help users to Track competitor pricing, product launches, promotions, and stock changes automatically. Get alerts the moment the market moves.
I checked out your app but I'm not sure what it is for. I see that it has a map with tourist destinations in Toyko and an itinerary feature. But since I already have Google Maps and Calendar, I don't understand what new benefits this app brings. It is not very convenient to browse through the suggested tourist sites on the map or the explore list -- you need filters and categories.
Worked on awardlocker.com for a while, an award flight search engine. I ended up buying a bunch of business flights with points so my interested died down a bit, but quite useful!
I'm working on inference.club, a distributed inference network for consumer hardware. Sign up with GitHub, get an API key, run an agent on your home network that registers your local inference resources with inference.club, set permissions for who can use your services, try out models in the playground and use the API. So far it supports the following models:
- LLMs (any OpenAI compatible API, vLLM, LM Studio, etc.)
- image gen + image edit (flux klein)
- text to speech (magpie, dia with voice cloning)
- speech to text (OpenAI audio transcriptions + riva compatible)
- image to textured 3d model (trellis2)
- image+text to video (ltx2.3-gguf)
- text to music (acestep)
currently it is just me and Claude vibing. While using Fable 5 moved all of my local inference services to k3s across 3 RTX 4090 PCs and my DGX Spark, now I can just tell Claude/Hermes/etc. to start and stop services.
inference.club is built with Tailscale's tsnet library. It is sort of like an OpenRouter built for different types of local AI models. inference.club also lets you showcase and share generated content. For example here is 90 seconds disco funk track generated by acestep: https://inference.club/s/Vxm6ozW24oBs_JGbPcq7tA
I was inspired by AI Horde, and wanted to see if I could build something that could support all of the model modalities that I use for generating short-form AI slop content on local hardware. This is also similar to Hugging Face Spaces, but running on consumer hardware with a common API. I've been watching the quality of local AI inference making massive improvements in quality and performance, and I want to make it easier for people to try "local AI" even if they don't have a GPU.
still working on https://hcker.news, which has an absurd number of features that improve your QoL when reading hn.
i've massively improved a bunch of things like the AI filter, which now gives you the option of filtering out github repos with AI authorship.
Also improved comments, which I'm serving through my own backend which has made loading of comments super fast, and it's going to be the foundation for some really great other features coming soon.
Soon: HN feature parity via browser extension and sync'd accounts.
Gonna give this the biggest compliment and highest honor I give alternative hacker news interfaces: I don't hate it!
I really like the simplicity of HN and this kinda keeps it (somewhat) in a way that I like.
When the comment overlay is open however, I was expecting tapping outside of it to close the overlay btw, not to let me tap the underlying stories and get redirected.
Trying to adept an O. Henry short story into an AI animation short.
If I'm happy with the results, will be sure to publish a detailed breakdown of the work.
My little project for today is sort of hardware hacking of Chinese Aubess WiFi switch with power monitor so I can reflash it without desoldering anything. :)
In my last role I spent a year building an agentic coding platform used by hundreds of thousands of people. Along the way I tried building a hosting service on OpenClaw, and also ran Hermes myself for a while. Both projects have some great feature ideas, but when I tried to use them for real work they failed more often than not, and their security models worried me. I just couldn't see either one becoming something I'd trust enough for myself/friends/family. After a lot of exploration I realized that what I really wanted all along was to create automations using the coding agent I already work in every day. It turned out coding agents were the best tool for automating anything, not just code, as long as they had the right environment and tools to work with.
I also spent 20 years leading Linux infrastructure and distributed systems teams. Anyone who's written service daemons knows that most of what we think of as "always on" is really just wake up, do some work, and go back to sleep, which is an efficient pattern to use and reason about. Cron has worked this way for decades.
So I built Clor, a CLI that lets your coding agent create "claws", which are background agents that automate anything on a schedule and run on your laptop, Mac mini, or a VM.
A claw can be defined and shared as a single CLAW.md file, which contains a bit of metadata (name, schedule, personality, etc.) and one or more ordered tasks. Each task is a real agent run with full tool use, or a plain bash step. Anything you can ask your agent to do once, a claw can do repeatedly. One of my claws tidies my inbox every few minutes, labeling obvious spam, rescuing legit email that got mislabeled, and starring threads I owe a reply to, etc. It's way smarter than Gmail's filters because it actually reads my mail instead of just matching rules.
Installing is the usual command on Linux/macOS in the terminal: curl -fsSL https://clor.com/install.sh | bash. That will set up the CLI, a small scheduling daemon, and a skill that you can run from your agent, /claws in Claude Code or $claws in Codex.
I've been on HN since it launched, so I've got thick skin and don't mind critical feedback. Please do give me any questions/comments/suggestions here or via email jake@clor.com
teale.com - distributed ai inference using networked devices
essentially folding@home but sharing underutilized ram (when you're asleep, someone else in the world is awake)
would really appreciate testers but also any companies thinking about distributed inference powered by their own company devices on a private network. my own company has 200+ 16gb ram machines that we're using for inference.
CRM with agent baked in that can properly do stuff. No idea why attio/twenty are soooo bad at this. It's a table. getcrme.com / https://github.com/ChristianSch/crme
and gargoyle, an activitypub server with a (theoretically mastodon compatible UI) https://github.com/myfedi/gargoyle. Was annoyed at the homogenous fediverse dev teams out there that don't want their precious service federate with others. I want more federation (tested it with bookwyrms and lemmy for now. Mastodon/GTS also working ofc) and a pretty UI and not waste time with weird identity politics. You do you. I want an open fediverse, not a filter bubble. And GTS was too hard to hack on.
I'm working on trying to get citizens' voices into spaces of power (councils, parliaments...). So far I've been experimenting with scrapping public records and building a solo (and multiplayer) experience for replaying plenary sessions.
if you're organizing fund-raisers for charity, your local sports club, or youth organization,
my personal pet project is still available to help you organize it.
Continuing to add small features to https://eventalix.org
if you're organizing fund-raisers for charity, your local sports club, or youth organization, my personal pet project is still available to help you organize it. Continuing to add small features to https://eventalix.org
learning to build local coding agents with mastra framework, doing basics at the moment, like reading the code, editing.
if you have built coding agent in the past using mastra, what are the problems you have faced with mastra? does it support complex branching/context trimming and other features required to efficiently manage context for AI agents?
still wip but QuiltOps which is basically just Quilt+Tooling so you can keep your package mods up to date with upstream. A new package drops (oh no another 0day in htop) and you want to apply your htop-but-with-xcowsay.patch and it will auto rebuild against your patchset or notify you on failure... Thats the idea anyway.
I am looking to build a platform that allows for real interview workflows like takehomes, agent coding sessions, as well as the standard leetcode-style questions
i am still working on easyanalytica tool to auto generate dashboards without ai .
I recently added comparison feature and figuring that out was fun. There are lot of interesting ideas on execution side of it but for end user its a simple product, just give data and see the dashboard.
https://www.learnchess.ai — The chess app I always wanted (I've tried a lot of apps in the last years but they always lacked some fundamental feature and/or had terrible UX).
trying to get AI-powered YouTube playlist generator to work well with podcasts: https://playlists.at/youtube/generate/
(GPT doesn't seem to be very good with podcasts.)
I'm working on (yet another) git worktree multi agent development tool that just runs in any terminal. Supports Claude Code, Pi and Codex agents and provides a CLI that allows them to work together in a given worktree. Currently messing around with having the agent drive the app itself to record and caption screencasts. Fun project that is also my daily driver for agentic development at the day job. Idea was born out of using Conductor and similar tools but preferring to work in the terminal and still lean on my preferred tools like lazygit, neovim etc... https://github.com/bakedbean/workspacex
Mourning the Fable 5 shutdown, I hacked together https://ismodelavailable.com/fable
The long-term plan is a sort of JustWatch for LLMs - which models are live, where, on what terms. Right now it's just a toy.
Slightly neglected but still chipping away at https://dataello.com — a cheaper alternative to Flourish for building interactive charts.
And the more serious stuff:
- a domain-agnostic engine for generating predictive models
- papers on disinformation, and on approaches to analyzing survey data
I built a dictation and meetings after trying other apps (Wispr Flow, Willow Voice, Granola, open source) and realised they're either user hostile, buggy or have limited feature set. For example, many of these dictations app opt you into Context awareness, which means your entire page contents get streamed to their server. The open source apps don't have dictionary, shortcuts (say "linkedin link" → and it pastes your actual link), or ability to use any proprietary API.
So I made my own dictation app. Supports arbitrary API providers (e.g. Deepgram, Speechmatics, Elevenlabs), Offline models and a subscription if you want it. Otherwise it's free forever for BYOK and offline models. Deepgram is a YC startup from 2016, and have models that are genuinely good - so it's up to you if you want to use them.
Also, Granola doesn't let you read your own meetings after 30 days. So I added a feature in DuckType to import your data from Granola, unlocking all your meetings from their paywall.
Another app: OpenCook https://open-cook.com/ . We curated and wrote our own recipes into StashCook, which requires a subscription just to read your own recipes on the web app. So I got Codex to extract our recipes and rebuild one that is open source, OpenAPI and includes AI features.
This won me 1 year of GPT Pro at the codex event :)
I hope you can tell... I'm tired of companies designing their products to lock you in, to charge you more, with no added value. I build software for people like me. So I'll be building more apps that replace this user hostile software.
Working on Gaming Couch, a web-based local multiplayer party game platform. It's like a lovechild of Jackbox Games and Mario Party: https://gamingcouch.com. More specifically I'm currently working on the 3rd party development tools so in the future anyone can make their game dev dreams a reality and make a simple and fun multiplayer party game for the Gaming Couch platform, ideally in only one weekend! If you're a game dev or aspiring to be one and want to develop and ship your own party game, check out https://gamingcouch.com/developers
The TL;DR of Gaming Couch:
- Currently in free Early Access with 19 competitive mini-games.
- Players use their mobile phones as controllers (you can use game pads as well!)
- Everything is completely web-based, no downloads or installs are necessary to play
- All games support up to 8 players at a time and are action based, with quick ~one minute rounds to keep a good pace. This means there are no language based trivia or asynchronous games!
I’m getting back into it again after a long break due to burnout. I’m still burned out but it’s getting easier to think through problems.
I’m building a home server. This was something I put off for years due to some perfectionism. Eventually I just threw together something with old hardware and headless Ubuntu. Much to my surprise, the power draw is only about $4 a month. I can live with that so no need for specialized hardware.
I’m doing the common -arr stack using docker compose. I’m using plex because the jellyfin doesn’t work as well on an Apple TV.
Having a server running is nice. I can set up some stuff on a whim. Most recently was the Mealie recipe manager. It’s great knowing my data won’t be paywalled. I’m using syncthing as a simple backup method between my devices - everything but media of course. It’s fine if I lose media.
An unexpected benefit of having the server is that it inspires my wife. She decided to give vibe coding a try. She’s an artist, not an engineer, but with a little help she was able to make a task tracker for us. She tailored it to the way we tackle our tasks and, again, it’s really nice knowing it won’t get paywalled in the future.
I’m still burned out, but having a server to tinker with is helping.
I have a similar setup at home, I’m sure you heard this before but I must +1 the Infuse app on Apple devices. It’s a much better client than Jellyfin’s but can connect to Jellyfin server no problem. No plex needed.
I have two projects that I'm hoping to release in the months ahead. These are both pretty pointless but fun projects.
One is a TRS-80 Model I emulator in JavaScript called Trash80. About 10 months ago I started this project just for fun while experimenting with what now seems to be called agentic loops. I got things working pretty well with the Z80 passing the ZEXALL suite and a lot of real TRS-80 software running fine. It sat for months untouched before I decided it is worth releasing and recently started it up again.
I didn't want to release it without a ROM, so I rigged up some agents to build a clean-room style L2 ROM w/ a fairly complete BASIC and even readline-style control commands, history, and a proper cursor. That went very well, but the agents cheated on floating point and implemented some weird Q5.2 like-thing. I told them to fix it, but I guess I didn't give clear enough instructions because they replaced it with a BCD hybrid monstrosity instead of proper floating point. The proper floating point is now underway, but I'm mostly using excess Codex credits before they expire, so it's only moving forward when I have credits I don't need.
I also built a silly ASCII fractal browser in Z80 assembly so that I can ship with a virtual disk that has software on it. The emulator works in the browser and the terminal. Unicode sextant block graphics map very well to TRS-80 Model I semigraphiccs/squots, so it really does run everything very well in the terminal, even games. I also added a line-mode for line-based applications, so you can use a readline-like interface and feel like it's native terminal app as well, though that has some issues I need to fix. And of course, you can shebang TRS-80 BASIC files and run them through the emulator too.
Another project was a demo of chromesthesia, a form of synesthesia where sounds trigger experiences of color. I thought it was done and ready to release, but then I had a new idea. The visualization while cool, was kind of boring. I decided to replace it with an attempt at a semi-physically accurate cymatics simulation with artificial coloring based on chromesthesia. Cymatics is the practice of making sounds visible by vibrating a surface, such as a plate with sand on it. As the sound changes, symmetrically interesting patterns form and evolve. I've got something working now with wave generation and microphone input, but sometimes it gets a bit stuck and stops evolving as it should, so I have to find time to figure that out.
Currently all unreleased, but when they do release it will be at www.leshylabs.com. I sometimes post updates on X, but not too often. (https://x.com/LeshyLabs)
I'm working on a thing I'm calling TOASST, or the Tiny Open Android Smartphone-based Smart Telescope. The basic idea is to use a smartphone (often the best camera in your house) to do electronically assisted astronomy/astrophotography a la Seestar. I've been working on the solidworks design for a mount to hold a phone for about 3 weeks and started the Arduino firmware this week. Eventually I'll write a small android app to control the mount and coordinate astrophotography sessions, hosted via wifi hotspot so you can see the results coming in on another device.
This project started when my partner told me I couldn't buy a Seestar, so I decided "fuck it, I'll build my own!" It's still early days but I think there's something cool here. I'm designing the whole thing to be easy and cheap to print and build. I hope someday this will be the kind of project that a sufficiently motivated teenager will be able to build with minimal experience and an old smartphone; maybe it's healing my inner child, lol.
I'm working on (yet another) Hacker News browser extension, mostly to scratch my own itch. The desktop experience on HN is fine, but I don't love mobile support or lack of dark mode.
I've tried some alternatives, but Modern for Hacker News seems abandoned. Harmonic is great (they just released v3 as well), but it's Android only.
According to Firefox the extension has a grand total of 2 users, with one of them being myself.
A few tools to de-enshittify/enhance specific websites.
I don't have to tell the Hacker News crowd how junked up the web has become.
* Bookmarklet to cleanly extract lyrics from Genius.com.
* Firefox add-on to cleanly display lead sheets and guitar tabs on UltimateGuitar.com
* Firefox add-on to show Distance From City on TrustedHousesitters.com.
https://versastudio.com/projects
I have been building a coding agent for small and even tiny LLMs, local inference. I experiment with Qwen 3.5 0.8B but that is too tiny. 4B is a better one for most of my needs. I mix with 9B and then up to 20B models (not on my computer).
It builds on an opinionated tech stack - Rust (Actix Web, Diesel, SQLite) and Typescript (Solid, DaisyUI). There are multiple agents which play roles like PO, PM, Architect, Rust Engineer, Typescript Engineer and so on.
The idea is to go from user prompts to Epics/Tasks - PO/PM do this. Then to go from Tasks to YAML or similar syntax (I have not figured this out yet) and break into Rust and Typescript code dependencies.
I am focusing on the Rust side: how can small models write Model, Controller, Router, User/Permission and custom business logic in helper functions (called from Controller or BackgroundTask). Building a set of types to express business logic, for example in https://github.com/brainless/nocodo/blob/feature/praxis_agen...
Then I will use tree-sitter to build a graph of which business logic (in the helper functions) correspond with which provenance (source of truth given by user).
There is no tool calling for most of the agents, no MCP, no multi-turn chats. Most of the code writing agents one-shot the response with a lot of code reference in their prompts.
WebCLI - screenshots are a dead end. MCP is too verbose and clunky. Agents native language is text. Web CLI is just a Unix-y CLI that pipes/translates the web to text. Run any task on a web browser, but don't do it yourself (only the parts you have to - MFA, Login, CAPTCHA, whatever). An agent + WebCLI does anything you throw at it.
web go news.ycombinator.com
cat reply.txt | web say -
web find add comment
web do 44
just. like. that. Super simple. CLI or REPL. You can do it by hand but you probably don't want to, just give it to an agent. Run web teach to imprint the SKILL.md files into the current directory tree and an agent can hit the ground running. It's the end of browser automation for everything but super scripted fixed path CI/testing etc (those latter things where pptr/playwright/et al are still ok). WebCLI is browser improvization. Try it - 5 days free. I sprinted on this the last few weeks. It's really good. So useful. https://webcli.sh/
I've been continuing work on cardcast.gg. It gives you the ability to play Magic: The Gathering with your friends remotely using a webcam.
In the last month or so I added a few nifty features:
- Auto-scan functionality: Instead of having to click on cards to discover what they are, I can now do whole-frame detection on an interval (configurable), so players can mouse over the webcam stream of another player and automatically see what the actual card is. Super helpful for deciding who to attack and makes turns quicker!
- Card view is now grouped by player, since auto-detection will populate a lot of cards during the course of a game.
- Switch the video stream to Livekit from my homebrew version. Players were having video trouble and I hope Livekit is good enough so solve that problem.
Next up: I really want to build a community around this, and I'm struggling on getting the word out to people / having them try it out. I've done some SEO and word of mouth advertising, but haven't had much luck. I feel like I need to switch directions a bit. I'm a developer by trade, so this is wholly new to me.
It’s a book about computer networking, but deliberately not protocol-first. I’m trying to explain the shape of the system using analogies and mental models first, then map those back onto the real machinery.
That one is about risk management. I’ve been noticing time and time again, in multiple orgs I’ve worked with, that direction and implementation don’t align in many cases. Devs end up doing work that no one asked for, and middle managers tend to “invent” irrelevant work.
This is about learning software architectures using chaos testing. You can bring your own architecture, inject failures in safe environments, practice, and ultimately generate agent skills to automate fixes for these types of failures.
I wanted a site that aggregated as much space industry data as possible, but most other solutions were behind paywalls, even though most of this data is public or free in one way or another.
Built TechnoJam (https://technojam.app), a music-making app for kids 4+. It’s a DJ launchpad (drums, bass, melody, chords) but every tap is quantized to stay in scale, so kids with zero music knowledge can have tons of fun making electronic music.
Deliberately no ads, no subscription, no tracking, works offline.
I have been experimenting more with agentic iterative optimization: using LLMs to actually speed up code by finding and testing lower-level optimizations, specifically by having it build a real-world representative benchmark, then tell the LLM to optimize that benchmark without a) cheating the benchmark and b) ensuring code quality by some metric does not regress, e.g. MSE for machine learning algorithms. This is extremely effective with GPT 5.5, and recently I found another prompt optimization (https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48413304) that surprisingly results in another 2x speed improvement on average.
So far, I have mostly feature-complete implementations of the following, which are faster than the state-of-the-art implementations, up to 20x faster in some cases while matching or beating them in quality:
- a new 2D data visualization library, along with more bespoke data viz implementations such as word clouds and Primitive.
- programmatic image generation
- image compression
- a new statistical machine learning library, along with more bespoke algorithms such as UMAP and HDBSCAN
- a novel modelless invisible image watermarking approach
- a novel machine learning approach which may be a crime against data science but the performance is really good
- local text embedding generation with MLX
- image-to-ASCII art conversion
- grep/jq replacement (faster than ripgrep)
I aim to open-source them over the next months but the main bottleneck is the inevitable barrage of "gtfo AI slop" comments even if I dot every i and check every t, in addition to the distribution of new software being extremely difficult nowadays due to the death of social media and "20x faster" raising red flags even if I have the data to justify it.
I'm developing a tool that will help you easily delete your data from services. It scans the subject line and sender email address of the emails in your inbox and suggests an email draft to help you delete that service.
It's open source and self-hostable, with privacy and security as top priorities. I got the idea when Saymine.com was acquired by McAfee and became total bs...
This is my first project that I want to release to the public, and the official instance will be free to use. I'll try to keep costs low without sacrificing service quality, and I hope to keep the project afloat with donations because I believe everyone should have the right to easily remove their data, regardless of cost or technical expertise. I don't have anything to share yet because it's still in the early stages of development, but it's looking good so far.
Fairly predictable given the times: a plugin for coding assistants that supports a development workflow that I like :) It's at https://www.shipsmooth.net/.
Perhaps the more interesting bit is that it's in Java (not Typescript or Rust)! Java 25 is pretty neat. Bonus: getting to know how to distribute a self-contained Java program using jlink and the likes: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/specs/man/jli...
- A hand-crafted browser game-engine and game for the engine, with things like determinism at the core. I will be launching soon and can't talk too much about it yet because its quite novel. It actually has quite a few novel ideas within. Very minimal usage of AI in this project, I've been working on it for ~6 years now. A bit toooo long.
- A pure slop-crafted browser extension, because I paid for claude code Fable and it got rug-pulled so I am burning my tokens on a 100% slop project just to see what hands-off coding is actually like. A slight distraction from project 1 I do when I'm feeling a bit burnt out. Super fun so far proc-gen type stuff. Derivative
After attempting a charity push up challenge in Feb I wanted to contiune with a similar app to track reps, so I build paayn (push ups are all you need).
It's deliberately minimalistic PWA that uses you mobile's sensors (camera, using lux levels and/or acclerometer) to count reps.
I included squats and sit ups later to round it out but it kinda made the name bad :)
Still finding a job, but it’s getting harder to do anything.
Other than that, working on 2 projects:
1. KitchenCue: Smart cooking assistant. Always had the problem of what to cook. AI suggests options based on your preferences, locality, and pantry, what you can make.
2. Sci-fi editor: Even though sci-fi tells the most futuristic stories, the tools are just meh? I am trying to make something so you don’t have to worry about timeline and physics inconsistencies. It will help you with science and histories.
I'm working on a Chrome extension for X that adds language learning features: https://uselangbot.com. I think it's a bit too niche for it to become a viable business, but let's see... usage is growing the more I talk about it.
Fun fact: I coded it by hand (because I enjoy doing that), which I think in 2026, puts me into the psychopath group according to most.
The nichest of niche social network clients. It's for people in one particular country, who watch one particular TV program, on one particular day of the week.
Now that the cost of writing software is zero, I love that my focus have moved from vain attempts to generate passive income to just building whatever random shit I feel like. Wish I'd made that choice earlier in life, but no worries!
taking sabbatical from work (after getting laid off)
went to visit family in moldova.
my nieces tell me there is no app to learn romanian online - this cant be true.
I do a bit of research and turns out this is mostly true, mostly these websites built for english speaking people, meaning you learn romanian - but starting from english.
at the same time I need to dig in into all the rails 8 goodies.
also, I've been hearing about this cloudflare thing, and not knowing what's that about.
also, heroku is shit now, so Im curious to try some new server, hetzner u say? - wonder what's that like.
kamal is a thing now, ok.
but coding is ... time and energy intensive, what is this vibecoding ppl talking about?
anyhow May 20th I sit down to "vibecode" an app - see what happens.
one thing led to another and here we are
found some romanian words ranked by frequency.
found free open db of romanian words on dexonline.
found google TTS to transform text to sound.
found that cloudflare has storage sooooo much cheaper than aws s3 (only one I used for decade)
found that cloudflare has some neat useful features.
found that server at hetzner is pretty cheap and with ai easy to setup.
found that fable/opus are great at generating content (with some hand holding)
found that AI now is stupid good at building / designing websites.
it was impossible for me to build something like this without second monitor and tweaking css for days/weeks. now?
I just tell it make it pretty. god damn. inspiring and disheartening at the same time.
still very early and im trying to keep it very affordable, since the whole point is I dont want people wasting their money on hustles that were never legit
not quite, it doesn't just flag everything as false. Some hustles
come back with high legitimacy scores and realistic income ranges
that actually match the claims, but might take longer to earn the first dollar. The point is separating the method from the creator's real monetization — sometimes they're the same thing, sometimes they're not. if people are gonna fall for these quick hustle tactics and lose money, id rather them use this and make sure its not a full waste of time
are there any related to networking? i contribute to a lot of openwrt packages (well mainly, only the ones i use and would love to find a few fun tools around that domain.)
I’m working on Descartes[^0]. First to help diagnose what’s wrong with a machine.
I’ve started implementing actual background monitoring of the system, and next will be letting an agent build its own layers of tailor-made deterministic rules and statistical models, to "learn" what the system’s normal behaviour is and only "wake up" the agent when something unusual is going on. Either to update its rules and models, or alert the user.
Like the ship’s AI at the beginning of Absolution Gap. Next will be enabling it to serve as the interface for the system. An ops "point of contact" for both the user and their agents for the machine / fleet of machines it’s in charge of.
———
I’m also working on third thoughts[^1], a tool that analyses local agents logs to find patterns and behaviours, identify what works, what doesn’t, how they evolve over time, using deterministic and statistical methodologies and techniques from multiple domains (including, to my surprise, genetics and psychology / sociology), with an agent layer that interprets the results.
I’d like to add a "federative" layer where people can contribute the results, patterns, and findings, without leaking their logs or personal / private data, so that we can all better learn how to identify failure modes, predict them, and see what works and what doesn’t.
———
I’m also having Claude & Codex revive Jasonette[^2], which died off and was turned into some weird paid unrelated thing by those who picked it up. I’d been meaning to but never took the time. But now with agents…
All rebuilt in Swift / SwiftUI on the iOS side, and Kotlin on the Android side. Some features are still missing, but it works quite well! [^3].
———
Oh, and Boucle[^4] is doing its thing on its own. No idea how it got to 100 GitHub star. My "autonomous dog-fooding expensive pet" is apparently more "internet successful" than I’ve ever been.
Its one of the options. Other is sniping new pools and copy trading. Im trying to develop zero/same-slot tx landing with shredstreams first, because its basically needed to be competitive.