Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: The way something is done.
Green group hint: Make sure to dry that off!
Blue group hint: Enjoy the show!
Purple group hint: Teachers may require this.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Technique.
Green group: Gross things that form on wet surfaces.
Blue group: Parts of a theater.
Purple group: Counted in document word counts.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is technique. The four answers are fashion, manner, method and way.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is gross things that form on wet surfaces. The four answers are crust, film, scum and skin.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is parts of a theater. The four answers are catwalk, pit, stage and wings.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is counted in document word counts. The four answers are character, line, page and word.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.