B&H Photo is one of our favorite places to shop for camera gear. If you’re ever in New York, head to the store to check out the giant overhead conveyor belt system that brings your purchase from the upper floors to the registers downstairs (yes, seriously, here’s a video). Fortunately B&H Photo’s website is here for the rest of us with some good deals on photo gear we love.
Father’s Day Deals at B&H Photo
Not sure what to get for Dad this Father’s Day? You’re in luck. B&H Photo has a whole section of Fathers Day specials, including deals on cameras, video equipment, lighting, audio, computers, storage, smart home, TVs, and more. Plus, B&H Photo has shopping guides to make gift-giving even easier, with music and audio gift ideas for parents, buying guides for photographer parents, and more. This includes Father’s Day gift ideas, which also include a classic Pentax 17 Film Camera, a stylish and practical Evergreen Cases Legacy Camera Sling, and more.
Save on the Latest Gear at B&H Photo
B&H Photo has plenty of great deals, including Nikon's brand-new Z6III full-frame mirrorless camera for $2,196.95 ($300 off). The Z6III (8/10, WIRED Recommends) is a huge update for the Z6 line, and a great all-around camera for Nikon fans. There are also great deals like the Nikon Zf (8/10, WIRED Recommends) full frame mirrorless camera for $200 off, or the Nikon Z8 for $600 off.
Not in the market for the latest Nikon cameras? There are plenty of other deals, like our favorite action camera, the GoPro Hero 13 for $70 off (7/10, WIRED Recommends), and Sony’s a7R V full frame mirrorless camera for $400 off.
Why a B&H Gift Card Makes the Ultimate Tech Gift
Not sure what to get the tech or photography lover in your life this holiday season? A B&H gift card is a gift people on your list will actually want. B&H has tech for every person in your life, with hundreds of models of cameras, computers, projectors, and more.
How Do I Get Free Shipping at B&H?
One of the many perks of B&H Photo is their generous free shipping policy. Most orders at B&H over $49 qualify for free expedited shipping to the lower 48 states. The savings just keep coming, as most items totaling under $49 also qualify for free standard shipping in the contiguous US. If for some reason your order doesn't qualify for free shipping, you can review alternative shipping options during checkout—full shipping policy details can be found here.
Best Times to Find B&H Promo Codes and Discounts
Like most retailers, B&H Photo offers some of their best deals of the year during Black Friday and Cyber Monday, but that doesn’t mean there aren’t other ways to save outside of this sale period. There’s still time to jump on extended holiday sales, with up to $300 24-hour camera discounts, and featured price drops across all accessories. While there may not be any B&H promo codes available at the moment, there are plenty of other ways to save at B&H.
Exclusive B&H Student Discounts
If you’re a student with an EDU email, sign up for B&H Photo’s student discount program, which offers free shipping on most orders and exclusive discounts.
Score Deals on Used and Refurbished Gear
B&H Photo also deals in used and refurbished gear. Deals (and conditions) vary, and I have never purchased a used item this way, but if you’re looking to save some money, that’s another way to go.
Trade-in Your Old Gear at B&H
The flip side of B&H Photos used deals is that you can sell your old gear. I put in my old Sony a7 II and was offered $210, which is more than I would have thought. Your offer is contingent on it matching the condition you claim, but if you’ve got gear you aren’t using anymore, this is a way to turn it into some extra cash.
Save More With B&H Photo Deal Zone
The B&H Photo Deal Zone is one of the best ways to save on your camera and tech purchases. With new, rotating deals updated and added everyday, this is the place to find the best, limited-time prices on B&H Photo gear. Whether you’re in the market for a discounted Lenovo tablet or a Logitech wireless mouse, B&H Photo has the best deals online in one place, making shopping for discounted tech easier than ever.