Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Planar-Sector LOS Guidance for Interception of Agile Targets with Lifting-Wing Quadcopters
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Autonomous visual interception of agile aerial targets is challenging due to unpredictable target motion, limited sensing, and the strong coupling between target visibility and interceptor maneuverability. Most existing strapdown-camera interception methods preserve visibility using conic line-of-sight (LOS) constraints that keep the target near the image center. While safe, such symmetric constraints unnecessarily restrict maneuverability and can significantly reduce the usable thrust for pursuit. Motivated by the observation that aggressive FPV pilots do not maintain equal visibility margins in all image directions, this paper proposes a Planar-Sector Line-of-Sight (PS-LOS) guidance framework for autonomous interception using a lifting-wing quadcopter equipped with only a strapdown monocular camera. PS-LOS tightly constrains lateral image error while relaxing longitudinal image error within a safe field-of-view margin, preserving visibility while releasing maneuverability for acceleration-intensive pursuit. Under the lifting-wing quadcopter model, PS-LOS provides nearly 50% more available thrust near the LOS direction than conventional conic LOS constraints. To realize LOS-only interception without direct depth measurements, a delay-compensated state-estimation framework and a nonlinear guidance-and-control architecture are developed for lifting-wing quadcopters. Extensive outdoor flight experiments demonstrate autonomous interception of agile targets exhibiting large-amplitude, high-frequency, and unpredictable motion under real wind disturbances. The proposed system achieves successful interceptions at ranges up to 138 m while maintaining continuous visual tracking throughout the engagement. The results validate PS-LOS as a visibility-preserving, maneuverability-aware guidance framework for long-range visual interception of agile aerial targets.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.