Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:MS-rPPG: Multi-spectral State Space Model for Remote Photoplethysmography in Driver Monitoring Systems
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) is a camera-based technique for measuring physiological signals, particularly cardiac activity. From the remotely measured signals, heart rate can be estimated, which is crucial for health monitoring. In this study, we investigate a driver health monitoring system based on remote heart rate estimation. However, driving environments represent uncontrolled settings where videos are subject to varying illumination conditions and frequent head movements. We introduce MS-rPPG, a multi-spectral framework that combines RGB with near-infrared (NIR) face video to alleviate rPPG estimation under challenging driving conditions. To combine the complementary features from two spectral videos, we propose a cross-spectral linear modulation (CSLM) strategy based on frequency-domain analysis. Moreover, we introduce MS-Mamba, a novel state space model designed to effectively model long-range temporal dependencies while jointly capturing cross-channel interactions between multi-spectral features. We collected a real-world dataset called MS-Drive, which was recorded from 50 participants while driving the vehicle. The proposed method was evaluated on the MR-NIRP Car dataset and MS-Drive datasets. The experimental results indicate that MS-rPPG shows better robustness and heart rate estimation accuracy than previous methods, highlighting its promise for driver health monitoring. The codes are available at this http URL.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.