Mathematics > Metric Geometry
Title:Magnitude-Based Features for Multispecies Spatial Data
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Multispecies spatial data arise in many applications where interactions between different entities are central to system behaviour, including biomedical imaging, geospatial analysis, and species ecology. Despite their importance, relatively few quantitative tools exist to capture such interactions. In this work, we propose magnitude-based features for the analysis of multispecies spatial data. Magnitude is a real-valued invariant of finite metric spaces that can be interpreted as an effective number of points, incorporating both spatial configuration and scale. We develop global and local magnitude feature vectors and demonstrate their utility on synthetic tumour microenvironment data, and in tissue microarray data from human colorectal cancer samples. Locally, the method identifies distinct neighbourhood types and reveals spatial heterogeneity; in the model, this includes radial patterns associated with different qualitative outcomes of the simulations, while in the real-world data it reflects the importance of tertiary lymphoid structure-like interactions between B and T cell populations. Globally, the approach recovers known classifications of long-term simulation outcomes across parameter regimes in synthetic data, and suggests important roles for CD4+ T cells and CD163+ macrophages in distinguishing patients with favourable Crohn's like reactions from unfavourable diffuse immune infiltration. Together, these results suggest that magnitude-based features provide a powerful and flexible tool for the analysis of multispecies spatial data.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.