Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Symmetric Entropy-Constrained Video Coding for Machines
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:As video transmission increasingly serves machine vision systems (MVS) instead of human vision systems (HVS), video coding for machines (VCM) has become a critical research topic. Existing VCM methods often bind codecs to specific downstream models, requiring retraining or supervised data, thus limiting generalization in multi-task scenarios. Recently, unified VCM frameworks have employed visual backbones (VB) and visual foundation models (VFM) to support multiple video understanding tasks with a single codec. They mainly utilize VB/VFM to maintain semantic consistency or suppress non-semantic information, but seldom explore how to directly link video coding with understanding under VB/VFM guidance. Hence, we propose a Symmetric Entropy-Constrained Video Coding framework for Machines (SEC-VCM). It establishes a symmetric alignment between the video codec and VB, allowing the codec to leverage VB's representation capabilities to preserve semantics and discard MVS-irrelevant information. Specifically, a bi-directional entropy-constraint (BiEC) mechanism ensures symmetry between the process of video decoding and VB encoding by suppressing conditional entropy. This helps the codec to explicitly handle semantic information beneficial to MVS while squeezing useless information. Furthermore, a semantic-pixel dual-path fusion (SPDF) module injects pixel-level priors into the final reconstruction. Through semantic-pixel fusion, it suppresses artifacts harmful to MVS and improves machine-oriented reconstruction quality. Experimental results on classical video understanding tasks and MLLM-based tasks show SOTA rate-task performance. It achieves significant bitrate savings over H.266/VVC reference software VTM on video instance segmentation (37.4%), video object segmentation (29.8%), object detection (46.2%), multiple object tracking (44.9%), and MLLM-based video grounding (97.6%).
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.