Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:CORE: Conflict-Oriented Reasoning for General Multimodal Manipulation Detection
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The rapid rise of generative AI has made multimodal fake news increasingly realistic and pervasive, posing severe threats to public trust and social stability. Existing detection methods rely heavily on manipulation-specific models and large-scale labeled data, resulting in poor generalization to emerging manipulation types. We observed that the essence of manipulated misinformation lies in its intrinsic conflicts, \textbf{i.e.,} semantic or physical inconsistencies either across modalities or with common world knowledge. Inspired by this observation, we propose \textbf{C}onflict-\textbf{O}riented \textbf{RE}asoning (\textbf{CORE}) framework, an effective paradigm that learns to endows multimodal large language models (MLLMs) with explicit conflict-capturing capability. To this end, CORE first constructs the Conflict Attribution Corpus (CAC) with fine-grained annotations of conflict factors and sources, providing essential data support for subsequent conflict perception training. By performing conflict-oriented representation enhancement and reasoning based on CAC, CORE achieves robust and generalizable conflict detection, effectively and rapidly adapting to unseen manipulation types with a few samples or in even zero-shot settings. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CORE surpasses state-of-the-art models. The dataset and code are publicly available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.