Amazon Prime Day is just around the corner. This year, the deals officially kick off on June 23 and run through midnight Friday, June 26, but there are already some good early Prime Day deals available the weekend before the big event. Whether you need a new laptop, an Alexa speaker, or some noise-canceling earbuds, you can shop today.
Updated June 20: We've got seven new deals, including a new art TV from Amazon, the best air fryer you can buy, and a stylish power bank.
- The best laptop around: MacBook Air (M5) for $950 ($149 off)
- Budget-friendly earbuds: Nothing Ear (a) Wireless Earbuds for $53 ($28 off)
- The best all-in-one espresso machine: Breville Barista Express for $500 ($193 off)
- A small Echo speaker with great sound: Echo Dot Max for $65 ($35 off)
Laptop and Monitor Deals
Microsoft just announced an update to the Surface line, and yes, it'll be slightly faster, but it's also significantly more expensive, especially with this deal happening now. The 7th Edition, as this model is known, is our favorite Windows laptop. The highlight here is the screen. It's a touchscreen with a 120-Hz refresh rate and a taller 3:2 aspect ratio, which, once you use a 3:2 you won't want to go back to a 16:9 screen. You also get some features you don't often see in a thin, light laptops, like a USB-A port.
Our favorite laptop for most people, the MacBook Air is deceptively powerful with the update to the M5 chip. (Did you know the GPU in the M5 Air is as powerful as the M3 Pro MacBook Pro?) The M5 makes everything significantly faster, whether you're rendering video or playing games. The fan-less chassis makes it one of the thinnest laptops you can buy, and the battery lasts a full workday. This deal has been coming and going for a few weeks, but it's close to the lowest price we've ever seen.
This deal makes an already cheap monitor even less. The MSI Pro E14 is our favorite cheap monitor. It might lack some of the adjustment possibilities of more expensive models, but it offers what you really need, namely, great image quality. It'll go up to 359 nits at its brightest, and the color coverage is surprisingly good, both in terms of saturation and accuracy. You even get a 144-Hz refresh rate, which is good enough to game.
Deals on Headphones and Earbuds
Apple’s AirPods Pro are the best earbuds for Apple users. In fact, they're the best-selling headphones on the planet. The third-generation AirPods Pro (9/10, WIRED Recommends) offer industry-leading noise canceling and great call quality, thanks to better design and improved ear tips with a bit of foam added. Then there’s the real-time translation, heart rate monitoring, and easy pairing with Apple devices to round out the features. Did we mention they're comfortable? They are, and they get about eight hours of battery life, which makes them perfect for an entire workday.
The Beats Solo 4 headphones feature great warm, clean sound in a minimalist package. There's no noise canceling or auto pause feature, nor is there any water-resistance rating, but you get up to 50 hours of playback per charge, the ability to plug in with either 3.5-mm or USB-C for lossless audio, and one-touch pairing with most devices. You also get solid wireless range and a compact carrying case for easy packing.
The 2026 iteration of the AirPods Max 2 are some of the best headphones Apple fans can buy. The have Siri, Live Translation, head-based gestures, and more, along with some of the best noise canceling on the market, deep bass, and shimmering highs. If you're an iPhone user, there's just no reason to get a different pair of over-ear headphones.
Bose’s properly named QuietComfort Ultra are some of the best noise-canceling headphones you can buy. The QC Ultra Gen 2's sound is also impressive, providing clear and crisp detail especially in movie dialog, thanks to Cinema Mode. There's also support for lossless audio over USB-C, and the battery will last you about 30 hours with ANC on and 40 with it off.
Sony has been cranking out the awkwardly-named WH-1000XM Series headphones for years, and they've been topping our list of the best headphones for about as long. These aren't the latest model (that's the MX6), but they offer active noise canceling and most of the same tech; they just don't fold down as small. Did I mention they sound awesome? They do.
These budget-friendly, well-made earbuds boast a majority of the same features as AirPods Pro but cost about half as much, even less on sale for Prime Day. The 45 dB of noise cancellation is plenty for most things, and the mics offer great sound on calls (even better if you have a Galaxy, Pixel, Xperia or other phone that supports high-resolution Bluetooth codes).
The Beats Flex offer a lot of the same features you'll find in the more expensive Apple earbuds: quick pairing, easy access to Siri, and seamless Apple Music integration. They offer crisp sound and a wide soundstage, all without the muddy bass that Beats was notorious for in its early days. You also get 12-hour-plus battery life.
This is our favorite gaming headset. It features an expansive 7.1-channel soundstage, and the software gives you tons of control over the quality of your voice. We love the way voices sound on streams, podcasts, and Zoom calls. When you're not gaming, we like that they look more normal than flashier headsets from other gaming brands.
Tablet and Tech Deals
This deal has been coming and going all year now, so maybe not what you'd call a Prime Day deal, but it's still a good price (the lowest we've seen is only $20 less).
The Combo Touch (8/10, WIRED Recommends) is a keyboard, trackpad, and kickstand combo—our favorite way to get work done on your iPad. The keyboard is also detachable, so you can easily remove the keyboard when you don't need it, and, since it uses Apple's Smart Connector, you never have to futz with Bluetooth or worry about charging it. This deal is on the iPad Pro version, but there's also a model that fits the iPad Air (M2) on sale for $170 ($30 off)
The Arena 9 is SteelSeries' top-of-the-line surround sound system, and it's our favorite surround sound system for your PC. You get a central speaker, with a pair of front speakers and a control unit, all of which plug into a large subwoofer. The pair of rear speakers connect to each other and then a separate power outlet, but they connect to the rest of the system wirelessly, so you don’t have to run long cables. You need a good-sized desk to fit it all, but if you want surround sound in your games, there's no better option.
Samsung's T7 portable drive isn't the latest and fastest you can buy, but any deal on any drive right now is worth mentioning given the skyrocketing prices of memory and storage. The T7 still has respectable read/write speeds (it scored 876 MB/s in my large file write test), and it's thin and light enough to slip in your pocket and not notice it.
Our top pick for a Smart Bird Feeder, the Birdfy Lite offers a 1080p camera with a nice, wide 155-degree field of view, allowing you to capture the full bird rather than just heads and butts. The plastic enclosure is IP65 rated, and it's proven durable and easy to clean in our testing. There's also the option to buy an add-on solar panel, for a greener feeder.
The new Amazon Ember Artline is one of our favorite art TVs. It's well designed and, mounted against a wall, blends nicely into your decor. You can even match the artwork color to fit your room. When you turn off the lights, the Ember Artline puts itself to sleep. The downside is that the contrast ratio isn't quite as good as what you'll find in more expensive competitors like Samsung's The Frame. But for the price, the Ember Artline is hard to beat, especially with this deal.
The TCL QM8K is our favorite OLED TV for bright rooms. The complete lack of bezels, combined with the included pedestal mount, makes it look like it's just floating there in your room. The screen is excellent, with vivid colors and a 5,000-nit max brightness that'll really pop when cranked up. With a 144-Hz refresh rate and dedicated gaming mode, it'll even work for some light gaming. It supports all the most popular HDR formats, including HDR10+ and Dolby Vision IQ, giving you all the brightest whites and darkest blacks you can get.
This tiny tube of a speaker offers most of the same features you'll find in larger Sonos speakers but with an IP67 dust- and water-resistance rating. Combine that with 10 hours of listening time, and you have a great speaker for the backyard, or throw it in a backpack and head to the beach. It's about the size of a 16-ounce beer can and easily fits in cup holders and bags.
The Garmin Instinct 3 is one of Garmin's most popular watches. It offers the same multiband GPS navigation capability, stellar battery life, and ability to survive in harsh environments as the more expensive Fenix 8, but it's cheaper, lighter, and, if I may say so, looks more fun. Both the solar and non-solar versions are on sale, but we prefer the solar.
Despite its age, the Charge 6 remains our favorite Fitbit. The bright AMOLED touchscreen is easy to read, and it covers all the basics, monitoring your heart rate, blood oxygen, and skin temperature. It'll even measure ECG and electrodermal activity scans to measure irregular heart rhythms and stress level insights.
Amazon’s Eero mesh systems are the easiest mesh systems for most people to set up and use. They offer good coverage and deliver stable connectivity. The Eero Pro 6E is an elegant system, with an understated design that you'll hardly notice sitting on a shelf. There's a USB-C port for power and two Ethernet ports rated at 2.5 Gbps and 1 Gbps. The Eero is a tri-band system, with support for Wi-Fi 6E, the 6-GHz band, as well as 2.4- and 5-GHz bands.
This large-capacity power bank eschews the gray-brick aesthetic in favor of a transparent, vaguely cyberpunk design. It's plenty powerful too. The maximum output is 170 watts, and there's a 24,000-mAh battery in that unique, IP66-rated case. The smart display shows battery life as a percentage, time remaining, and the input or output in watts. It supports just about all your popular power standards, and you can simultaneously charge three devices at fast speeds.
Kitchen and Coffee Deals
Breville’s Barista Express is our favorite all-in-one semiautomatic espresso machine. It strikes an excellent balance between price, versatility, and performance. It offers consistent pressure for espresso, and its steam wand is excellent. Throw in a built-in grinder, and you have a great all-in-one machine. We often see it on sale for $600, but it only goes this low for Prime Day and other sales.
Espresso machines under $200 are generally not very good. The exception is De'Longhi's budget models. The De'Longhi Classic (once branded as “Linea Classic”) has features you won't find otherwise at this price, including a pressure gauge, a 15-bar pump, and a solid, thermoblock heating system. It's also got room for a good-sized mug under the handle rather than the usual tiny espresso cup.
The best immersion blender you can get, the Braun MultiQuick is perfect for small batches of chimichurri or pesto, for whipped cream, or for blending soup right in the pot. It packs 500 watts of power and is easy to stow away when you're not using it.
The Typhur Dome 2 is the best air fryer you can buy. Sure, it looks like a flying saucer from a bad 1960s movie, but it will crisp your wings, bake your pizza, and gently golden-brown your fries like no other. The griddle function is even capable of actual Maillard browning to chops and drumsticks. The catch is the high price, but this deal brings the cost down to earth.
Amazon Device Deals
The Echo Dot Max offers some of the best sound you'll find in an Echo speaker. It's impressively loud without getting muddled, especially considering its small size. Despite increasing competition, Alexa's great compatibility and voice controls continue to rise above the rest, making this our top pick smart speaker.
The second-generation Fire Stick 4K Select is a budget version of our top pick, the Fire Stick 4K Max. The Select only has 8 GB of memory (compared to 16 GB for the Max), and it lacks the live view picture-in-picture and Alexa Home Theater mode, but video quality and content options are the same. The picture-in-picture mode is handy sometimes, and we do expect the Max to be on sale once Prime Day starts, but if you don't need it, this is a solid deal on a decent streaming stick. And don't forget, sneering Roku fans, Fox is buying Roku—good luck with that.