Amazon Prime Day is here once again. Amazon's annual Prime Day deals aims to entice us with an endless scroll of “discounts" (some real, many fake), hammering away with red slashes, big percentages off, and coupons you can only see after adding to cart.
While Prime Day deals aren't what they once were—its success has inspired a massive number of fake deals and attracted obscure brands—there are still some very significant discounts to be found. For the next four days, the WIRED Reviews team will be pooling our hundreds of years of collective expertise to find actual savings on products we have personally tested and approved. Let us absorb the neon signage and “buy now” buttons on your behalf and share the deals worth sharing. We’ll keep this list updated frequently for the duration of the sale, which runs from June 23 to June 26.
Contributors: Louryn Strampe, Simon Hill, Nena Farrell, Martin Cizmar, Kat Merck, Matthew Korfhage, Molly Higgins, Luke Larsen, Scott Gilbertson
- The best MagSafe charger: Anker MagGo Power Bank (10K) (Qi2) for $65 ($25 off)
- The best mesh Wi-Fi system: Netgear Orbi 770 Series (3-Pack) for $570 ($130 off)
- The best Amazon e-reader: Amazon Kindle Paperwhite for $125 ($35 off)
- The best smartwatch: Apple Watch Series 11 for $279 ($120 off)
- The best slushy machine: Ninja Slushi Machine for $200 ($150 off)
- The best Android phone: Google Pixel 10 for $549 ($250 off)
Best Tech Deals
This is our very favorite MagSafe power bank. Wireless and MagSafe charging aren’t always the fastest or most efficient, but despite its bulk, this large-capacity bank can top off modern phones once (or maybe a little more than that) without overheating or taking forever. There’s a built-in kickstand and display, too. —Louryn Strampe
This remains one of my favorite Windows laptops, even if its recent price increases change the calculus on its value proposition a bit. I still think the screen is incredibly unique though, with its taller 3:2 aspect ratio. Once you see it in person, you’ll notice the difference right away. With more vertical screen space, you see more lines of spreadsheets, more content of websites, and more space on your canvas as a creator. A new version just got announced with a more powerful Snapdragon X2 chip inside, but it’s more expensive and not on sale yet.—Luke Larsen
The Wi-Fi 7 Netgear Orbi 770 Series is my current pick of the best mesh Wi-Fi systems for most households. This tri-band mesh (2.4-, 5-, and 6-GHz) offers simple setup, delivers stable and speedy internet connectivity, and boasts expansive coverage. The stylish tower design is unobtrusive, the internal antennas ensure your whole home gets online, and you get the key benefits of Wi-Fi 7, including MLO (Multi-Link Operation) to enable Wi-Fi 7 devices to connect on multiple bands simultaneously. —Simon Hill
The best portable power stations offer the freedom to go off-grid and keep your gadgets powered, and the Solix C1000 is my small pick. It has molded handles for easy carrying, weighs just shy of 30 pounds, and sports a handy display on the front. It boasts a 1,024-watt-hour capacity, can fast-charge smartphones, and has no trouble with small appliances. It can also serve as an uninterruptible power supply with a 10-millisecond delay. —Simon Hill
Kindles aren’t the only e-readers on sale. While I prefer the color version of the Kobo Clara, the black-and-white Kobo Clara BW is currently on sale on Kobo’s website. It’s a small size like the basic Kindle, but comes with a warm front light that it doesn’t have. Kobo recently raised its prices, so this sale brings it closer to its original price tag. —Nena Farrell
Jump to Section: Best Tech Deals, Best Amazon Device Deals, Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals, Best AV Deals, Best Home & Kitchen Deals, Best Beauty & Wellness Deals, Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
Best Amazon Device Deals
If you want a great e-reader for under $100, snagging the basic Kindle while it’s on sale is one of the only ways to pull that off. It’ll be the lowest price it’s been all year, available for $85 when it usually costs $110. It’s the smallest Kindle, with just a 6-inch screen, but still packs snappy performance, a bright front light, and great battery life. —Nena Farrell
Jump to Section: Best Tech Deals, Best Amazon Device Deals, Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals, Best AV Deals, Best Home & Kitchen Deals, Best Beauty & Wellness Deals, Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals
The Series 11 is the best smartwatch for iPhone users. Its most significant improvement is the 24-hour battery life, which makes it now suitable for sleep tracking. Other notable features include FDA-cleared hypertension notifications and Apple’s proprietary Sleep Score; plus, blood oxygen sensing is back. —Boutayna Chokrane
Our very favorite 3-in-1 charger for Apple loyalists features a spot to charge your iPhone, AirPods, and Apple Watch. It even includes a wall adapter, which is a rarity these days. The vertical storage means it’ll take up less space on your nightstand. It’s Qi2 certified and sturdy. —Louryn Strampe
Jump to Section: Best Tech Deals, Best Amazon Device Deals, Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals, Best AV Deals, Best Home & Kitchen Deals, Best Beauty & Wellness Deals, Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
The Best AV Deals
The second-generation Bose QuietComfort Ultra are one of our favorite noise-canceling headphones. Plush comfort, engaging sound quality, and natural transparency mode are just some of their best features. One of the most convenient upgrades is the ability to lay the headphones flat to put them into sleep mode and to wake them with on-head detection. They now support USB-C charging, and battery life has increased to 30 hours with active noise cancellation enabled, and 45 hours with it turned off. —Boutayna Chokrane
Jump to Section: Best Tech Deals, Best Amazon Device Deals, Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals, Best AV Deals, Best Home & Kitchen Deals, Best Beauty & Wellness Deals, Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
Best Home & Kitchen Deals
Perhaps the ideal wireless outdoor security camera for Google households, the Nest Cam Outdoor has a handy magnetic mount and an expansive 130-degree field of view, and captures sharp 1080p video with HDR and night vision. It also sports a clear speaker and microphone. You only get three hours of free event history, but you can add a Home Premium subscription ($10 a month, or $100 for the whole year) to get 30 days of event history and face recognition. —Simon Hill
When the OG Ninja Slushi arrived in 2024, it was a unicorn—a commercial slushie machine shrunk down to household size, and an invitation to a summer of margaritas and daiquiris and, uh, frozen Mike’s Hard Lemonade. But as Ninja releases newer models with better freezing capabilities like the Slushi XL and the Slushi Twist, the original Slushi is catching the biggest discount I’ve ever seen on it. Snap it up while possible. —Matthew Korfhage
Pans for automatic bread machines usually feature nonstick coatings of indeterminate origin, but the KBS Pro is one of the few models that has a ceramic coating free of potential PFAS. I’ve tested bread machines with both types of pans, and the ceramic works just as well. This is also the overall best in our guide to the Best Bread Makers. I’ve used it for white bread, wheat bread, and bagels, but it also has presets for jam and yogurt. —Kat Merck
WIRED reviewer Chris Null tested this sporty little robot, the middle model in Beatbot’s Sora line that also includes the 10 and the 70, for our guide to the Best Pool Cleaning Robots. He found it to be a good value, giving it a solid 8/10 rating despite its lack of surface-skimming capabilities. He loved its battery life, the fact it can float to the surface for easy retrieval, and the jazzy orange color, though the sale version on Amazon only comes in blue. —Kat Merck
The Midea U-shaped window air conditioner is a forehead smack of an idea, one that makes other bulky window air conditioners seem silly. It’s U-shaped, with a slot for the window. This makes the device easier to install, and the window can crack open when desired. After some fixes to drainage, this Midea remains the apex of convenience, performance, quietude, and energy efficiency. It’s a good deal—not the best this year, but the best you’ll likely see while it’s still hot. —Matthew Korfhage
I like this robot vacuum; its docking station is easy on the eyes and the vacuum looks more expensive than it is. My only complaint is that setup can be a long, annoying process. But once it is set up, it does a great job cleaning and the app is fun to use to track where the vacuum is in its cleaning schedule. —Nena Farrell
Moccamaster is forever. This precisely engineered, handmade coffee maker has been a buy-it-for-life pick for years. It’s been Scandinavia’s buy-it-for-life pick for decades. The warranty is five years, but it’s fully repairable thereafter. The coffee tastes delicious. It will be delicious your whole life, probably. A few times a year, Moccamaster goes on a serious sale. This is that time. We often recommend the KBGV model for its flexible batch size. But for larger batches, this thermal version will taste the best. —Matthew Korfhage
Jump to Section: Best Tech Deals, Best Amazon Device Deals, Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals, Best AV Deals, Best Home & Kitchen Deals, Best Beauty & Wellness Deals, Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
Best Beauty & Wellness Deals
The best deal in beard trimmers is almost always this Philips Norelco Multigroom. This is true especially now, when it’s about 30 percent off. The multigroom is both relatively quiet but high-rpm. It doesn’t nick but cuts close when it’s guardless. Attachments are easy to swap, including the nose-hair trimmer, and the battery lasts five hours. The only downside is keeping track of all the guards. A large ziplock bag is recommended. —Matthew Korfhage
The iRestore Elite is one of our favorite red light therapy devices for hair regrowth. The FDA-cleared helmet is embedded with a combination of 300 lasers and 200 LED lights, offering full scalp coverage and hands-free sessions. The three wavelengths are within the ideal range: 625, 655, and 680 nanometers. The rechargeable battery is also solid, lasting up to two weeks with daily use. —Boutayna Chokrane
The Hyperice Hypervolt 2 is the best-value massage gun. It’s under $200 and lighter than most Theraguns but offers impressive power with its brushless 60-watt motor. Included are five head attachments and a three-hour battery life. I especially appreciate the pressure sensor, which indicates whether I should apply more force or ease up. It syncs with the Hyperice app via Bluetooth, so you can follow the brand’s guided routines or control the speed from your phone. —Boutayna Chokrane
Jump to Section: Best Tech Deals, Best Amazon Device Deals, Best Apple and Apple Accessory Deals, Best AV Deals, Best Home & Kitchen Deals, Best Beauty & Wellness Deals, Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
Best Mobile & Wearable Deals
If you want all of Google’s latest artificial intelligence features and one of the best camera systems available, the Pixel 10 is impossible to ignore. Smooth performance, cute design, and Google’s elegant vision of what Android should be come together in an affordable package. Its bigger siblings offer slight improvements, but won’t justify the extra expense for most people. —Simon Hill
Samsung’s Galaxy Watch 8 is the ideal smartwatch for brand loyalists. It offers health and fitness tracking, including reliable heart rate monitoring, decent sleep tracking, and dual-frequency GPS for precise mapping. The automatic workout detection is among the best. Some of the newer additions, like the Antioxidant Index and Vascular Load, are intriguing, but they need further improvements in accuracy. There’s a lot to appreciate, but editor Julian Chokkattu advises approaching these features with a healthy dose of skepticism. —Boutayna Chokrane
The Google Pixel Watch 4 is the best smartwatch for Android users. It’s the first repairable smartwatch from Google, allowing you to replace the battery and domed display if necessary, with parts from iFixit. Editor Julian Chokkattu says the screen is bright, and the wellness features are accurate. Also, with cellular connectivity, it supports satellite messaging during emergencies. Battery life lasts around a day and a half, and charging is quick, providing more than 50 percent power after 15 minutes. —Boutayna Chokrane