Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:Compatibility-Aware Dynamic Fine-Tuning for Large Language Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is the predominant paradigm for aligning large language models (LLMs), yet it suffers from optimization instability and limited generalization. Recent work attributes this issue to pathological gradient scaling and proposes Dynamic Fine-Tuning (DFT) to correct it at the token level. However, DFT assumes all demonstrations are equally suitable learning targets, an assumption violated by the strong heterogeneity of large-scale instruction data, where demonstration-policy mismatch induces high-variance updates at the sample level. We introduce Compatibility-Aware Dynamic Fine-Tuning (CADFT), a principled extension of DFT that controls sample-level optimization variance. CADFT derives a dynamic, policy-dependent compatibility signal from model likelihoods to modulate supervised updates, suppressing high-variance gradients from incompatible demonstrations. We further propose a delayed, low-frequency compatibility-guided rewriting strategy to transform persistently incompatible demonstrations into learnable targets. We show that CADFT can be interpreted as a variance-controlled estimator that generalizes token-level stabilization in DFT to the sample level. Extensive experiments demonstrate improved stability, generalization, and cold-start reinforcement learning initialization, while remaining fully supervised and independent of explicit reward modeling.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.