Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:Multi-Faceted Interactivity Alignment in Full-Duplex Speech Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Full-duplex spoken dialogue models can listen and speak simultaneously, making them a promising architecture for natural conversation. However, current models are trained solely with supervised learning through token-level likelihood maximization, which does not directly optimize interaction-level behaviors, causing interactivity issues such as excessive silence and ill-timed turn-taking. Recent work has applied reinforcement learning (RL) to improve interactivity, but existing methods address only a limited set of interactive behaviors in their rewards. In this work, we propose a post-training alignment method that comprehensively improves the interactivity of full-duplex spoken dialogue models through RL. We address the four canonical axes of interactivity: pause handling, turn-taking, backchanneling, and user interruption. For each axis, we extract short audio segments from human conversation corpora and optimize the model with axis-specific reward functions. An extra LLM-based reward for response quality prevents semantic degradation. We apply our method to two open-source models, Moshi and PersonaPlex, demonstrating consistent improvements in interactivity on both offline evaluation with pre-recorded audio and real-time multi-turn dialogue evaluation.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.