Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Membrane-based Acoustic Microrobots
View PDFAbstract:Acoustic microrobots have emerged as a promising frontier for targeted drug delivery and minimally invasive medicine due to their high-power density and biocompatibility. Despite wide-ranging designs, conventional acoustic microrobots mostly rely on air microbubbles trapped within confined microcavities within the robot body, which suffer from limited operational longevity due to rapid gas dissolution and resultant shifts in resonance frequency. In this paper, we propose a robust, membrane-based acoustic microrobot that overcomes these limitations by employing a thin flexible Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane bonded over confined microcavities for microstreaming. The introduced design physically prevents gas diffusion, ensuring stable performance over extended periods at high actuation voltages. We systematically characterized the membrane-based acoustic actuator longevity, demonstrating consistent streaming and propulsion for over 24 hours of continuous operation. In addition, by embedding magnetic microparticles into the structural body, these actuators were successfully employed as microswimmers with directional control using low-intensity (2 mT) external magnetic fields. Finally, we demonstrate the scalability of the proposed design architecture down to ~100 um. This membrane-based approach establishes a reliable framework for the development of high-endurance acoustic microactuators and microrobots capable of performing long-term tasks.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.