Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:UP-NRPA: User Portrait based Nested Rollout Policy Adaptation for Planning with Large Language Models in Goal-oriented Dialogue Systems
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:To address the challenge that current dialogue policy planning methods struggle to dynamically adapt to diverse user characteristics, this paper proposes a User Portrait based Nested Rollout Policy Adaptation (UP-NRPA) online framework with Large Language Models. In contrast to conventional approaches dependent on model training and require offline reinforcement learning policy models for user groups, UP-NRPA enables dynamic customization of dialogue strategies through an adaptive mechanism. This is achieved by leveraging real-time user feedback alongside personality, preferences, and objectives mapped from the current user portrait, thereby adapting to user characteristics without offline reinforcement learning. In collaborative and non-collaborative dialogue benchmarks, UP-NRPA demonstrated considerable benefits, achieving an impressive 100% success rate in multiple dialogue tasks. Particularly in negotiation tasks, the sale-to-list ratio (SL) increased by 56.41%. This demonstrates that UP-NRPA can adapt to diverse user needs without requiring a training mechanism, enabling the dialogue system to adapt to user characteristics.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.