Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle offers some fun categories. I actually liked the purple grouping today! Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Think about The Three Stooges.
Green group hint: Round and round.
Blue group hint: Curiouser and curiouser.
Purple group hint: Not Pa, but close.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Classic slapstick props.
Green group: Things that spin.
Blue group: Featured in "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."
Purple group: What "MA" might refer to.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is classic slapstick props. The four answers are banana peel, cream pie, rubber chicken and seltzer bottle.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is things that spin. The four answers are globe, grindstone, gyroscope and roulette wheel.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is featured in "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland." The four answers are caterpillar, pocket watch, rabbit hole and tea party.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is what "MA" might refer to. The four answers are Massachusetts, master of arts, milliampere and mother.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.