Featured in this article
Nothing will ever really replace a paperback or hardcover book, but the best e-readers get pretty close while offering you the power to carry multiple books in a single device without weighing your bag down. E-readers, short for ebook readers, can store thousands of books in a slim, rectangular tablet with an e-paper screen. Those paper-link screens make it much easier on the eyes to read and feel closer to those paperbacks lining your bookshelves. You'll skip the notifications that your phone has, and you can even check out digital library books without leaving your house.
Most people think of a Kindle when they think of an e-reader, but you don't have to turn to Amazon for the best device. In fact, my all-around favorite is the Kobo Libra Colour ($260), which has a color screen and page turner buttons, and can even double as a digital notebook. If you're looking for the best Kindle, our favorite is the 12th-generation Kindle Paperwhite ($160). I've got an entire Best Kindles guide that breaks down the full Kindle lineup if you want more options from Amazon, too.
Looking for more reader recommendations? Don't miss our guides to the Best Kindles, Best Digital Notebooks, Best Reading Lights, Best Kindle Accessories, and Best Gifts for Book Lovers.
Updated June 2026: I've added testing info on the new Kindle Scribe Without Front Light in Honorable Mentions and details about Kobo’s price increases, as well as ensured up-to-date links and prices.
Comparing Our Favorite E-Readers
| Model | Display | Resolution | Color? | Storage | Weight | Battery Life and Charging |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Kobo Libra Colour | 7 inches, adjustable front light | 300 ppi, black-and-white; 150 ppi, color | Yes | 32 GB | 7.03 ounces | Up to 40 days, USB-C charging |
| Amazon Kindle Paperwhite (2024, 12th Generation) | 7 inches, adjustable warm light | 300 ppi (pixels per inch) | No | 6 GB | 7.4 ounces | Up to 12 weeks, USB-C charging |
| Amazon Kindle Paperwhite Signature Edition (2024, 12th Generation) | 7 inches, auto-adjusting front light | 300 ppi | No | 32 GB | 7.55 ounces | Up to 12 weeks, USB-C and wireless charging |
| Kobo Clara Colour | 6 inches, auto-adjusting warm light | 300 ppi, black-and-white; 150 ppi, color | Yes | 16 GB | 6 ounces | Up to 42 days, USB-C charging |
| Amazon Kindle (11th Generation) | 6 inches, adjustable front light | 300 ppi | No | 16 GB | 5.56 ounces | Up to 6 weeks; USB-C charging |
| Amazon Kindle Paperwhite Kids | 7 inches, adjustable warm light | 300 ppi | No | 6 GB | 7.4 ounches | Up to 12 weeks, USB-C |
Honorable Mentions
Below, you'll find a few more e-readers we like but don't necessarily love as much as our top picks.
Boox Go 7 ($270) and Boox Color Go 7 ($290): Boox is known for its wide range of e-paper tablets, including the Palma 2 recommended above. If you're looking for something a little larger with a similar Android-based experience, the Go 7 and Go Color 7 are a solid choice. There are page-turner buttons, and it's a nice square shape that's easy to hold and use. The Go 7 is black-and-white, but you can get a color screen for $40 more with the Go Color 7. I don't use color features a ton, so it's worth saving money if you won't either, but it's great that the price difference isn't steep.
Boox Palma 2 for $316: This is a fun little pocket-sized device, and it has a nice upgrade from the older model with fingerprint recognition, a faster CPU, and a newer version of Android. Former WIRED reviewer Adrienne So loved using it with the Kindle app, but she wished it cost less. It's currently unavailable, and I'm waiting to see if it comes back in stock or is replaced with a new version this year.
Kindle Colorsoft Signature for $280 and Kindle Colorsoft ($250): The Kindle Colorsoft Signature is Amazon's first Kindle with a color screen. It has a screen with an oxide backplane, which Amazon says delivers better contrast and image quality along with custom-formulated coatings and nitride LEDs for brightness and color accuracy. But the screen is capped at 150 ppi for color images, versus 300 ppi for black-and-white, and the experience of reading is still a little fuzzier when compared to the latest Paperwhite. It takes noticeably longer to process color images, too. It's missing features that are by now standard on other color e-readers, like page-turn buttons and stylus support. It's not a bad Kindle, and color does enrich the whole e-reading experience, but we suggest waiting for a discount during an Amazon sale event. Kindle has since launched a cheaper option, the Kindle Colorsoft ($250), which has less storage (only 16 GB, versus 32 GB) and no auto-adjusting light or wireless charging.
Kindle Scribe (2nd Gen, 2024) for $400: The second-generation Kindle Scribe is a great option if you want an e-reader that doubles as a digital notebook, but also want to remain within the Kindle ecosystem. It has a 10.2-inch (300 ppi) paper-like display with features like adjustable warm light and an auto-adjusting front light. The included Premium Pen also has a soft-tipped eraser (mimicking that of a No.2 pencil). With Active Canvas and expandable margins, you can also mark up ebooks and write notes in the side panel. Amazon has launched three new models of the Kindle Scribe since this one, but this older remodel remains my favorite if you want an e-reader that makes for a great digital notebook.
Kindle Scribe (3rd Gen, 2025) for $500: The latest Kindle Scribe arrived in December 2025 with a color version, a new exterior design that does away with the single thicker side, and equal bezels and frames across all sizes. It has a new home page design that makes it easy to access your latest books and notebooks, and a quick-notes page you can also hop into. It also has a new set of AI features that can summarize things for you and even send your notes to an Alexa+-powered speaker so you can ask questions about them, but overall, these features aren't necessary and just drive up the price. The older Kindle Scribe (2nd Gen) is still my preferred option if you want a Kindle e-reader that doubles as a digital notebook.
Kindle Scribe Colorsoft for $630: Amazon brought the color screen to the Kindle Scribe late last year, with a redesigned exterior to match the new third-gen Kindle Scribe. The Kindle Scribe Colorsoft works exactly how you'd expect, with a range of colors and tools you can use on the notebooks and while reading your books as well. There are also several AI features, which is part of what makes it so pricey. I think it's too expensive for not being able to transform into an e-paper laptop like the ReMarkable Paper Pro, but if you really wanted to stick with Kindle and have a colorful digital notebook and e-reader in one device, this is the one to get.
Kindle Scribe Without Front Light for $430: This is the third and final installment of Amazon's latest generation of Kindle Scribes. This one is similar to the new base Kindle Scribe (3rd Generation) but removes the front light and wireless charging, and has a max storage of 16 GB instead of the 32- and 64-GB options the 2025 Kindle Scribes offer. You can save some money with these cuts, but the loss of a front light is a pain if you're a night reader like I am. If you want a cheaper Kindle Scribe, I still prefer the second-generation model, though you'll lose out on AI reading features and the ability to connect to Google Drive and Microsoft OneDrive.
Nook GlowLight 4 Plus for $200: The 4 Plus is the only waterproof Nook in the lineup, and it has the biggest screen at 7.8 inches, along with 32 GB of storage. It also has physical page-turn buttons and a headphone jack for listening to audiobooks (but you can also connect wireless earbuds via Bluetooth). But it was often slower than my Kindle and tended to freeze. While the large library has cheap and even free ebooks, it's not as good a selection as Kindle Unlimited. The process of getting a book from the library on a Nook is also beyond frustrating. You'll need to download either Adobe Digital Editions or Android File Transfer before connecting the device to your computer physically and then transferring the files.
Nook 9-inch Lenovo Tablet for $150: If you mainly read cookbooks or other color-intensive materials, and you want a dedicated reader, you might want to consider this affordable tablet from Nook and Lenovo, which has the Nook app built in. As with the tablets mentioned above, you lose the E Ink screen and the distraction-free nature of an e-reader. You can at least turn off notifications while in certain apps, which I recommend doing for the Nook app. It ships with an old version of Android, and it's not built for heavy work like video or photo editing.
FAQs
How Do You Get Ebooks?
Ebooks can be cheap, but as with regular books, the cost can add up if you're a big reader. You should take advantage of your library card and check out ebooks instantly from the comfort of your home. We have a detailed guide that explains how to get free library books, but the short version is that most libraries distribute books via OverDrive. You can access these books a few ways, through Kindle or directly from OverDrive with a Kobo, or you can download the Libby app. These ebooks are automatically removed from your device and returned to the library when they're due.
Each e-reader's own book service varies in quality. Our favorite is Kindle Unlimited for $12 a month, which includes millions of titles, including audiobooks and magazines. Amazon's Prime Reading also offers a handful of free books every month, which is good to know if you already have a Prime account. You can even lend books to friends and family for a short while (or have them share a book with you). We have a roundup of the Best Ebook Subscription Services here.
What File Formats Do E-Readers Support?
The most widely used format is ePub, which works natively with all the e-readers in this guide except for Kindle—technically. You can still upload ePub files to your Kindle, but you'll have to use the “Send to Kindle” feature (through Amazon, your email, or the Kindle app) to convert it to Amazon's proprietary format called AZW. (Newer Kindles support AZW3 and KFX, specifically). Other formats that will work with these e-readers include PDF, TXT, HTML, DOC, and DOCX.
Can I Install Apps on an E-Reader?
The Kindle, Kobo, and Nook use proprietary operating systems that don't allow you to install third-party apps. The Boox, on the other hand, runs Android (mainly Android 11 and newer). So, that means you can use it to download any apps available in the Google Play Store or side-load apps from your computer.
Do You Need an E-Reader? What About a Phone or Tablet?
You don't have to buy a separate device to read ebooks. Smartphones and tablets are perfect for this purpose. You can use Amazon's Kindle app to read ebooks (iOS, Android), and even download OverDrive's Libby app (iOS, Android) for library book access anywhere as well. However, the E Ink screens found in e-readers are just nicer to look at. I also like that these devices are one-trick ponies; there are no notifications to be distracted by or social media feeds to doomscroll through.
If you'd still rather have one smart device you can read on and use for other purposes, take a look at our Best Tablets and Best iPads guides for recommendations.
What About a Digital Notebook?
I've tried just about every digital notebook on the market, which are designed for handwritten notes on an E Ink screen. E-readers with that capability usually still prioritize reading, though there are plenty of models I like that can do both. The Kobo Libra Colour is my favorite to annotate books, and it can double as a digital notebook, but it's on the smaller size. If you want a larger option, check out my full guide to every digital notebook I've tested and what's worth buying.
How Does WIRED Test E-Readers?
The most important thing we do when testing e-readers is read on them! We spend hours reading books acquired in a variety of formats, from books purchased directly from each brand's store, downloaded from local libraries via OverDrive/Libby, or PDFs acquired for free from God knows where.
In the process, we evaluate battery life, brightness, lag, screen responsiveness, and text sharpness. We check for extra tools like annotation and whether or not the tablet accommodates accessories like a stylus. We also note if the tablet has other features, like waterproofing or access to great exclusive subscription services.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.