In times like these, as the economy worsens, “Buy Now, Pay Later” services boom, daily bills skyrocket, and inflation continues to surge, it's more important than ever to make that dollar stretch.
Thirty dollars doesn't get you as much as it used to, but we've been scouring to find the best discounts and deals on WIRED-tested and -approved gear for less than that. We have deals on cheap tech, from tried-and-true budget packing cubes to my favorite easy-to-use electric kettle.
We've hand-tested and vetted all the deals on this list, so you can be assured this is the best price you'll find. Plus, we're constantly scouring for more deals throughout the sales event and adding more of our favorite budget finds, so check back often.
Crazy for deals? Be sure to check out our guides to the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals, Amazon Prime Perks You May Not Be Using, How to Shop Like a Pro During Amazon Prime Day, and How to Avoid Scams and Subpar Wares on Amazon.
- A Dry Lips Savior for $16 ($8 off)
- A Cheap Multiuse Handheld Fan for $12 ($2 off)
- Our Favorite Cheap Chef's Knife for $9 ($4 off)
- A Smart Faucet-Like Pet Fountain for $22 ($8 off)
- A Phone Kickstand-Wallet Combo for $24 ($6 off)
- Our Favorite Compression Packing Cubes for $24 ($19 off)
- Our Favorite Pet Camera for $27 ($22 off)
- A Life-Tested Electric Kettle for $30 ($6 off)
A Dry Lips Savior for $16 ($8 off)
Every winter, my lips looked like sad, shriveled worms that had been left out to dry on the sidewalk after a rainstorm. Even after religiously applying lip balm every hour, my lips would get cracked and flaky without fail every winter. That is, until I discovered this lip mask from Laneige. I absolutely love Langeige's stuff, but it's often much pricier than I'm willing to pay for a luxe lip balm or facial lotion. You leave this thick mask of murumuru butter and vitamin C on while you sleep for smooth lips come morning. Right now it's on sale for $17, which is the lowest we've ever seen it.
A Cheap Multiuse Handheld Fan for $12 ($2 off)
This is one of WIRED editor Kat Merck’s top handheld fan picks. It's small (and cheap) but mighty, with two blades that produce a strong breeze at 472 feet per minute and a quiet noise level (44 dB on low), and it’s lightweight at only 4 ounces. Plus, it's basically a camping or outdoor adventure Swiss Army knife, doubling as a flashlight and portable power bank. At only $12, you'll be happy you carried this during your next summer adventure.
Our Favorite Cheap Chef's Knife for $9 ($4 off)
We on the WIRED Reviews team are bandwagoners when it comes to Kiwi knives. This brand has a cult following due to the fact its knives are cheap but have a thin, light blade that holds an edge just as well as pricier knives. Because this chef's knife is made of materials that are a little softer, it'll need to be sharpened more regularly to maintain its sharp edge. This simple knife works excellently for most small kitchen tasks, and we think it deserves a spot in most kitchens, especially at this uber-cheap price.
A Smart, Faucetlike Pet Fountain for $22 ($8 off)
If your pet likes drinking from the faucet, this is the automatic pet fountain for you. I recommend every cat owner get a pet water fountain, as most cats struggle to consume enough water, which leads to potentially lethal UTIs and blockages, especially in male cats. Plus, cats see stagnant water as potentially harmful because, in the wild, unmoving water is prone to bacteria. So, cats are naturally more drawn to moving water, and a fountain like this encourages them to drink more. Although this fountain is cheap, it has pretty much everything I look for in a fountain: It works either battery-powered on a charge for cordless placement anywhere (for up to 30 days), or plugged in. It also has dual flow modes, continuous or intermittent, a wireless pump for easy cleaning, and a stackable design that simplifies setup, cleaning, and changing the filter. On sale for only $22, now's a great time to see if a fountain works for your pet.
A Phone Kickstand-Wallet Combo for $24 ($6 off)
This is a magnetic kickstand wallet for iPhones that can be set at three angles, depending on what you need: one for scrolling, one for streaming media, and one for video conferencing. We like that the case feels sturdy enough to stand in different configurations without being too bulky. Although you sacrifice storage for this slim, lightweight design, plan on carrying only two cards in this one. Regularly $30, it's 20 percent off right now.
Our Favorite Compression Packing Cubes for $24 ($19 off)
If you're going on a trip and realize that you may need more organization, it's hard to beat a six-pack of Bagsmart's basic packing cubes. We appreciate the compression feature that packs the most into a tight space, the higher-end looks, the fine-mesh front cover for spotting contents at a glance, and convenient label windows to keep your set organized. Plus, Bagsmart offers 25 color and pattern options so you can keep things fly while you fly with color-coordinated luggage.
Our Favorite Pet Camera for $27 ($22 off)
This is the pet camera we recommend for most people. It dispenses treats and has two-way audio and 360-degree panning abilities so you can see the whole room. This camera comes with a surface mount where it pans left and right for a whole-room view, and has ultra-clear 1080p HD color and night-vision resolution. Plus, there's two-way audio so you can hear, talk to, and see your pet, and you can even dispense treats through the app. If you subscribe to Furbo’s Nanny service, through the app you can play highlights from the day that are broken down by activity or motion, and it sends safety alerts about things like smoke or fallen objects, along with chewing or barking/meowing alerts. In my opinion, this is the best pet camera you can get for under $30.
A Life-Tested Electric Kettle for $30 ($6 off)
My life was forever changed when I moved in with my roommate about 10 years ago and learned the joy of an electric kettle. I like that this kettle is stainless steel and plastic-free, with an internal plastic-free water level indicator and level markings. To work, all you have to do is push down the clear tab at the bottom, and the blue LED light automatically turns off when the water has boiled. With a simple press of the switch, you'll have boiled water in about four minutes—no more time wasted watching the pot.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.