Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Physics-Guided Dual-Stream Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network for Predicting Full-Field Structural Response of Stiffened Panels
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Iterative design and optimization of large, complex structures require fast and accurate prediction of stress, displacement, and other fields. Finite element analysis (FEA) is computationally expensive for this task. Existing neural network surrogates often struggle with varying topologies and complex boundary conditions. This study proposes the novel Dual-Stream Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network (DS-HGNN) for full-field stress and displacement prediction in thin-walled structures, demonstrated on box beams made of stiffened panels. DS-HGNN operates on panel-level heterogeneous graph representations and introduces physics-guided edge states initialized from edge types, spatial information, and boundary kinematics. These states are updated through dual-stream message passing that separates longitudinal and transverse structural information while allowing cross-stream exchange. Geometry and loading effects are incorporated through Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM)-conditioned 1-D spectral convolutions, and physical fields are reconstructed using a spectral-bypass low-rank readout. The model is evaluated on stiffened panel datasets with different geometries, boundary kinematics, loading conditions, and material nonlinear responses. DS-HGNN achieves the lowest stress and displacement RMSE compared with six benchmark heterogeneous graph neural network models. It also reaches comparable accuracy to the strongest benchmark models using 19%-38% fewer training samples. A targeted evaluation further shows that DS-HGNN captures yield and post-yield stress features.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.