Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:LLM-Guided Neural Architecture Search for Robust Co-Design of Physical Neural Networks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Deploying neural networks on unconventional hardware demands architectures that co-optimize task accuracy and platform-specific constraints such as energy cost, physical non-idealities, and numerical precision. Existing neural architecture search (NAS) methods are typically tailored to a single hardware family, limiting cross-platform comparison and generalization. We introduce Unconventional Hardware Neural Architecture Search (UH-NAS), a hardware-agnostic, LLM-guided NAS framework that integrates language models as evolutionary operators to co-optimize accuracy and inference energy. By exposing hardware as a swappable backend with per-platform energy models, physical constraints, and non-ideality simulators, UH-NAS enables fair system-level comparisons across various backends without modifying the search algorithm. Tested on optical MZI hardware, UH-NAS discovers more diverse, robust architectures than conventional baselines while outperforming existing LLM-to-NAS approaches. Additional ablations on architecture robustness under non-idealities and the role of system prompts highlight the importance of architecture-hardware co-design for emerging computing platforms.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.