This month, Rivian begins customer deliveries of the highly anticipated R2 model that aims to bring the startup’s aspirational adventure lifestyle to the mainstream EV market. That has required cutting costs, scaling production, and reaching new customers—a big brief, then, for the diminutive R2.
To show exactly how a startup transitions to a mass-market automaker, Rivian hosted a picturesque media event in Utah that included both on and off-road driving in the Launch Edition that stickers for just under $60,000 (including destination). We also got plenty of access to the technological development that underpins the brand’s critical electric crossover.
The R2 almost perfectly matches the dimensions of today’s best-selling US cars. This dedicated two-row model, versus the R1’s three-row S or pickup truck T, measures 185.9 inches (4,722 mm) long, or about 1 inch (25.4 mm) longer than a Honda CRV. The R1’s instantly recognizable profile and design language carry through, but unique packaging requirements dictated nifty design solutions.
In person, the R2 surprised me with a smaller presence than expected—the length, width, and height seem nearer to Toyota Rav4 size at 180.9 inches (4,595 mm) long. The optical illusion may stem from Rivian using a semi-monocoque and sandwich battery layout rather than a true skateboard, providing more than 9 inches (229 mm) of additional wheelbase than the Rav4.
Depending on the drive mode, an R1 sits around 8 inches (203 mm) taller, while a Tesla Model Y measures 1 inch longer and just under 3 inches (76 mm) shorter. As befitting Rivian’s off-roady ethos, the R2’s ground clearance matches a base Jeep Wrangler Sport or Sahara at 9.6 inches (244 mm).
That extended wheelbase allowed Rivian to stretch the second-row legroom versus the R1 while also affording enough space within the passenger doors to fully roll the window glass down. The low beltline, especially compared to the many “coupe”-style SUVs and crossovers on the market, combines with an upright profile to make aerodynamics seem like something of an afterthought.