Computer Science > Robotics
Title:SplatlessDF: Continuous Distance Field Mapping with Non-Splatting Gaussians
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Recent Gaussian splatting (GS) methods have shown that scenes can be represented efficiently with optimisable Gaussians for high-quality reconstruction and rendering. In this paper, building on this principle, we introduce SplatlessDF, a continuous distance field (DF) mapping framework that uses anisotropic Gaussian elements from a spatial rather than photometric perspective. SplatlessDF directly parameterises the Gaussians and optimises to recover a differentiable DF, enabling distances and gradients to be queried in the spatial domain for downstream robotic tasks such as navigation. Furthermore, SplatlessDF can be coupled with 2D Gaussian splatting (2DGS), providing a unified framework based solely on Gaussian primitives that can learn continuous DF and surface models and supports photometric rendering. We consider two settings: a standalone DF-only formulation and a joint DF-rendering formulation coupled with 2DGS. Experiments show that the standalone formulation provides efficient and accurate distance and gradient queries, while the joint formulation improves rendering geometry and simultaneously models a continuous DF. These results highlight the potential of GS-style representations not only for surface modelling and rendering but also for mapping representations suited to robotic navigation.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.