Computer Science > Multimedia
Title:DiffPC: Diffusion-Based Projector Photometric Compensation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Projector photometric compensation corrects color distortions introduced by surface texture, reflection, and ambient lighting. Existing deep learning-based methods usually require professional scene-specific data collection and lack consideration for perceptual quality. To address this limitation, we present a diffusion-based photometric compensation method that reconstructs compensation images under photometric and content-aware guidance. Specifically, we first model the photometric distortions introduced during projection as environment-dependent additive noise, thereby reformulating the photometric compensation problem as a denoising task with physical constraints. Next, we introduce a diffusion model, which generates compensation images by following an additive trajectory to iteratively remove the noise. Finally, to accurately estimate the noise at each timestep, by analyzing the factors that contribute to distortions in the physical process of projection and capturing, we design a noise estimation network that incorporates features of both photometry-aware and content conditions. Experiments show that our method achieves superior visual performance in unknown scenarios, thereby exhibiting significant practical advantages over prior methods.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.