Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:SRT: Super-Resolution for Time Series via Disentangled Rectified Flow
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Fine-grained time series data with high temporal resolution is critical for accurate analytics across a wide range of applications. However, the acquisition of such data is often limited by cost and feasibility. This problem can be tackled by reconstructing high-resolution signals from low-resolution inputs based on specific priors, known as super-resolution. While extensively studied in computer vision, directly transferring image super-resolution techniques to time series is not trivial. To address this challenge at a fundamental level, we propose Super-Resolution for Time series (SRT), a novel framework that reconstructs temporal patterns lost in low-resolution inputs via disentangled rectified flow. SRT decomposes the input into trend and seasonal components, aligns them to the target resolution using an implicit neural representation, and leverages a novel cross-resolution attention mechanism to guide the generation of high-resolution details. We further introduce SRT-large, a scaled-up version with extensive pre-training, which enables strong zero-shot super-resolution capability. Extensive experiments on nine public datasets demonstrate that SRT and SRT-large consistently outperform existing methods across multiple scale factors, showing both robust performance and the effectiveness of each component in our architecture.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.