The big three memory makers may come to regret opening up the door to Chinese memory makers; Microsoft, meanwhile, is very incentivized to use Chinese models.
Subscribe to Stratechery Plus for full access.
Already subscribed?
$15 / month or $150 / year
With Stratechery Plus you get access to the subscriber-only Stratechery Update and Stratechery Interviews, and the Sharp Tech, Sharp China, Dithering, Greatest of All Talk, and Asianometry podcasts.
Stratechery Update
Substantial analysis of the news of the day delivered via three weekly emails or podcasts.
Stratechery Interviews
Interviews with leading public CEOs, private company founders, and discussions with fellow analysts.
Dithering
A twice-weekly podcast from John Gruber and myself: 15 minutes an episode, not a minute less, not a minute more.
Sharp Tech
Andrew Sharp and myself discuss how technology works and the ways it impacts our lives.
Sharp China
A weekly podcast from Andrew Sharp and Sinocism’s Bill Bishop about understanding China and how China impacts the world.
Greatest Of All Talk
A twice-weekly podcast from Andrew Sharp and Ben Golliver about the NBA, life, and national parks.
Sharp Text
Sharp Text is an extension of GOAT, Sharp Tech and Sharp China, where Andrew writes about basketball, technology, and US-China relations with weekly posts.
Stratechery Updates are also available via SMS, RSS, or on this site. Please see the Stratechery Update Schedule for more details about delivery times and planned days-off. Please note that all subscriptions auto-renew monthly/annually (but can be cancelled at any time). If you are interested in ordering and managing multiple subscriptions for your team or company, please fill in the form here.
Frequently-Asked Questions
How do I subscribe to the Stratechery Podcast?
Once you are subscribed, please visit your Delivery Preferences where you will find easy-to-follow instructions for adding Stratechery Podcasts to your favorite podcast player.
Can I read Stratechery via RSS?
Yes! Create a Stratechery Passport account, go to Delivery Preferences, and add your personalized RSS feed. Free accounts will have access to Weekly Articles, while subscribers will have access to the Daily Update as well.
Can I share a Stratechery Update subscription with a friend?
No, the Stratechery Update and Stratechery Podcast are intended for one subscriber only. Sharing emails, using shared inboxes, or sharing RSS feeds is a violation of Stratechery’s Terms of Service, and your account may be suspended or your RSS feed reset. Of course occasional forwarding of the Stratechery Update to interested friends or colleagues is totally fine.
Can I switch to an annual plan?
Yes! Just go to your account page, choose the ‘Subscriptions’ tab, and click the Annual upgrade button. You will be charged immediately, with a prorated discount applied for the remainder of your current monthly plan.
Do you offer a student discount?
Stratechery is purposely kept at a low price — thousands of dollars less than other analyst reports or newsletters — to ensure it is accessible to everyone, including students.
Can you create a custom invoice that meets my government/company requirements?
I am happy to create an invoice to your specification for annual subscribers; however, it is simply not viable for me to offer this service to monthly subscribers. Therefore, if you need a custom invoice please subscribe or switch to an annual subscription and contact Stratechery.
June 1, 2021 Update: We are hoping to add native support for custom invoices to Passport; you can subscribe to Passport Updates to be notified when it is available.