I'm just not that excited about the new AI features that Apple announced during the WWDC 2026 keynote. Sure, we're getting an updated Siri with contextual awareness and Spatial Reframing for adjusting photo composition, and many folks will love those features. But I don't use Siri, and I've disabled Apple Intelligence on my iPhone and MacBook to prioritize battery life.
However, there was one announcement at the top of the WWDC keynote, a small change that has me breathing a big sigh of relief: MacOS Golden Gate will finally make the corner radii consistent across windows and apps.
If you're a MacOS Tahoe user, you've probably noticed that the roundness of your window's corners will vary from app to app. That's the corner radius. The windows of Apple's native apps like Safari and Freeform became slightly more round, while many third-party apps like Google Chrome didn't make the same change.
I can't tell you how many times I've switched from Chrome to Apple's Notes app on my Mac, only to see the corners of my Chrome window popping out from the back. Graphic design isn't exactly my passion, but still, the corner radii have been driving me up the wall since I installed MacOS Tahoe. It was never a problem in previous MacOS versions, and until last year, it wasn't something I ever expected from Apple.
"Attention to detail has always been core to Apple's DNA," said Stacey Ford, VP of OS Program Management, during the keynote. Which makes it all the more baffling that the inconsistent window corners shipped with MacOS Tahoe, let alone remain unchanged for an entire year.
Apple knows that consistency is fundamental to good design. The company has maintained the same corner radii across its products, even matching the rounded corners of its MacBooks with the curved design of its AirPods cases. When things are meant to line up, they should line up. When you go against that expectation, you risk drawing attention to a feature for all the wrong reasons.
MacOS Golden Gate won't be released until September, so I'll have to put up with the mismatched window corners for a few more months. Or maybe I'll install the public beta when it's available in July. I've never participated in Apple's public betas before, but honestly, this might be a good enough reason to take the plunge.