Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:A fully GPU-based workflow for building physics emulators of hypersonic flows
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The ability to resolve complex physical phenomena with high fidelity and at low computational cost is central to addressing key challenges in modern engineering. A prime example lies in hypersonic flows, where the precise prediction of the full flowfield topology, in particular with respect to shock wave location and intensity, is critical. Yet supersonic and hypersonic flows continue to be a stumbling block for traditional reduced-order models and neural emulators that struggle to capture steep gradients in flow states with physical consistency in applications of industrial relevance. To that end, we introduce a fully GPU based workflow that integrates accelerated data generation with the training of neural emulators augmented by uncertainty quantification and physics-aware refinement. Our workflow is enabled by a differentiable high-fidelity solver (JAX-Fluids) which we employ for rapid dataset creation and residual-based improvement of the neural emulator to enhance physical consistency. Building on this framework, we first present a suite of model architectures and analyze their scaling behavior to expose their strengths and shortcomings. We then show that residual-based refinement enables training on cases where only mesh and input parameters are available, substantially reducing residuals and improving physical consistency. Together, differentiable simulation and residual-based refinement yield physics emulators that remain reliable beyond their training distribution, a key requirement for deploying surrogates in real-world engineering design loops.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.