Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Contextual Role Modulates Object Representational Geometry in the Human Brain
View PDFAbstract:The human brain represents objects in a way that is both invariant across instances and flexible enough to support different contexts and tasks. Yet it remains unknown how object representations are dynamically remapped as the same object shifts across contextual roles. Using fMRI during naturalistic movie viewing we investigated how the same objects are represented when they are passive scene elements versus targets of goal-directed actions. Action targets engaged a parietal action network centered in the supramarginal and postcentral gyri, while passive objects recruited a distributed occipito-temporal network involved in visual object recognition. Within context-selective networks, representational geometry showed a double dissociation: target objects were organized by action affordance and hand posture affordance dimensions, while passive objects aligned with semantic dimensions. Visual representational structure was invariant to context. Outside these networks, representational content retained invariance, indicating that flexibility and invariance operate at different levels of the same representational system. These findings demonstrate neural remapping of object representations depending on moment-to-moment changes in contextual roles during a naturalistic scene.
Submission history
From: Julien Dirani [view email][v1] Fri, 22 May 2026 00:13:27 UTC (2,274 KB)
[v2] Tue, 26 May 2026 17:59:01 UTC (2,275 KB)
[v3] Thu, 4 Jun 2026 15:53:09 UTC (2,275 KB)
[v4] Wed, 10 Jun 2026 18:25:19 UTC (10,805 KB)
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.