Meta left potentially sensitive information collected from employee laptops accessible to anyone inside the company, according to an internal security notice seen by WIRED and three current employees familiar with the issue.
The data, which was collected as part of a divisive initiative to train artificial intelligence models, is believed to include keystrokes, mouseclicks, and content displayed on the computer screens of Meta’s US employees.
Meta spokesperson Tracy Clayton initially confirmed to WIRED that the company is investigating the security issue. As this story was being published, he added that Meta is pausing the data collection program indefinitely. "We have carefully designed this program with privacy safeguards and while we have no indication at this time that any data was improperly accessed by Meta employees, we're pausing it while we investigate," Clayton says.
The security notice sent out Monday indicated that “employee data across 45,000 hive tables,” had been exposed. Those tables included employee activity such as “full prompts and transcriptions, private conversations, people and performance data,” according to documents viewed by WIRED.
Some employees at Meta quickly seized on the security failure, saying in internal forums that it validated concerns they had raised when the company began tracking workers’ corporate laptops in April as part of a program known as the Model Capability Initiative.
| Got a Tip? |
|---|
| Are you a current or former Meta employee who wants to talk about what's happening? We'd like to hear from you. Using a nonwork phone or computer, contact the reporters securely on Signal Peard33.24 and at ChaoticGoode.12. |
Comments about the incident posted on internal forums Monday included questions about how Meta’s privacy reviews failed to prevent the breach, and whether everyone whose data was potentially exposed will be allowed to attend a meeting going over what went wrong, according to posts seen by WIRED.
In one internal forum where staffers are known to trade jokes, an employee posted a meme from The Office of the character Jim Halpert holding a sign that reads, “0 days since our last nonsense.”
Sources at Meta, who were not authorized to speak publicly, tell WIRED the incident has now been marked as closed, meaning it was likely resolved.
In an internal post responding to employees’ questions on Monday seen by WIRED, Andrew Bosworth, Meta’s chief technology officer, said that the tracking program’s implementation had fallen short of the standards outlined in its privacy review and that findings from the incident would be shared. “Here we had misconfigured ACLs [access control lists] and we need to understand how that happened, track down every data access and understand it,” Bosworth wrote.
A couple of months ago, Bosworth told employees concerned about potential data leaks that the tracking program is “tightly controlled” and uses the same protection standards, storage systems, and access controls as other sensitive datasets, according to internal posts seen by WIRED.
Last month, more than 1,600 employees at the tech giant signed an internal petition protesting the laptop surveillance effort, warning that “collecting this data introduces both security and regulatory risks for Meta, including the potential for breaches and unauthorized disclosure.” The petitioners also expressed concerns with what they viewed as a lack of safeguards that Meta had put in place. One engineer also wrote a widely shared internal note saying having their laptop screen scraped for training data without their consent felt like an invasion of privacy and amounted to exploitation.
Meta executives have previously defended the data-gathering project, saying it was necessary to train AI systems to use computer software the way humans do. In audio of a company meeting leaked last month, Mark Zuckerberg, Meta’s CEO, told employees that “AI models learn from watching really smart people do things,” and the “average intelligence of the people who are at this company is significantly higher” than the average contractor who could be hired specifically to produce this kind of data.
But after widespread protest from employees, Meta this month began offering more exemptions to the monitoring, including letting staffers briefly turn off the surveillance so they could complete sensitive tasks, such as scheduling a personal appointment, according to two people familiar with the matter. Some employees are still demanding that the tracking be stopped altogether.
Meta faces more regulatory scrutiny about data security than most companies. It is subject to a US Federal Trade Commission consent decree that expires in 2040 requiring it maintain processes to avoid breaches. But current and former employees have told WIRED that the requirements are inadequate and outdated. Meta also has also begun offloading some work reviewing programs and features for potential privacy and security risks to artificial intelligence. It wasn't immediately clear whether AI played a role in the access control issue with the MCI data.
The security incident will likely contribute to the ongoing morale crisis at Meta, where employees have been frustrated by the past few years of mass layoffs, a turbulent reorganization, and an all-out push to develop AI models and features. In March, Meta created a new Applied AI team and moved some 6,500 employees into new roles focused on improving AI models. Some Meta staffers have described the projects they have been assigned as menial and “soul-crushing.”
Bosworth sent out a memo to employees last week apologizing for the company’s “atrocious” communication about the AI reorganization and promising improvements, including clearer communication and the return of some office perks.
Update 6:25 EDT, 6/22/2026: This story was updated with clarification from the Meta spokesperson and additional context.