If you’re considering a virtual reality headset, Meta is the first place to stop. The Quest headsets have become the de facto choice for casual and even some enthusiast VR adventurers, thanks to their appealing price point, respectable performance, and wide digital catalogue of titles. While you can often find discounts on software, markdowns on the actual hardware are relatively uncommon, and rather than finding a Meta Quest promo code, you’re more likely to get a direct discount or bundle from Meta and other retailers. I’ve got a few coupons that will save you money on a new headset, accessories, and, of course, the best games and apps to check out.
Get $50 Off the Meta Quest 3 With Today’s Promos
There are two models to choose from: Quest 3 and Quest 3S. The more budget-friendly of the two is the Meta Quest 3S (8/10, WIRED Review). It has a slightly lower resolution screen, and the pass-through isn’t as sharp, but most people will be happy with it. It’s currently marked down by up to $50, taking the price as low as $250. If you want to spend those savings accessorizing, some of the extra add-ons are marked down by 20%. I’d recommend picking up the Elite Strap with a battery, which will improve the comfort and make up for the limited battery life.
If you're looking for an extra game to go with your new headset, you can also use our links to score $30 in Quest Cash with the purchase of a new Quest 3 or Quest 3S headset. You can use that Quest Cash in the store to buy games or apps, and it’s good for DLC as well, if you want to pick up some extra courses for Walkabout Mini Golf, for example, one of my favorite games. You’ll get the cash for your account once you’ve activated the device—make sure to click here to buy the Quest 3, or use this link for the Quest 3S.
As a frequent Quest 3 user, a Quest+ subscription has been well worth the price. You typically get access to at least two free games every month, yours to play as long as you claim them during the month and keep your subscription active. There are a ton of games in the included library too, and regular discounts on DLC and big releases. If you pick up a Quest 3 bundle, you can score three months of Quest+, plus Batman: Arkham Shadow, one of the best single player immersive story games for the platform. That gives you a chance to try tons of games and titles, and is a great place to start diving into virtual reality head first.
Shop Refurbished For Meta Quest 3 Deals and Ray-Ban Glasses From $239
While “refurbished” might be a dirty word to some folks, to me it sounds like savings. Particularly when a product is coming from the manufacturer refurbished, you can usually trust that it’s been properly cleaned, checked for any issues, and reset to factory settings. Scuffs and dings can happen, but generally if they go back to manufacturers, they can replace cosmetic parts easily, and you’ll get warranty support if any problems arise.
If you’re looking to pick up the more powerful Quest 3, and still want to save some cash, there are refurbished units available for just $380. That’s a $50 discount from a new model, and you get the same great hardware, cleaned and checked by Meta directly. The refurbished units have one year of warranty support, a pair of Touch Plus controllers, plus a charging cable and power adapter.
Alongside the Quest virtual reality headsets, refurbished pairs of the Ray-Ban Meta glasses are also discounted as low as $239. There are various styles and colors available of the Gen 1 glasses (6/10, WIRED Review), including the classic Wayfarer. If you pick up any of the refurbished smart glasses, you’ll get free shipping and a 30 day return window, in case you don’t end up liking the fit or style.
Unlock up to 50% Off Meta Quest Games With Coupons
If you already have a headset, and you're looking to pick up some games, we spotted some great discounts on new and classic titles. The excellent Batman: Arkham Shadow is marked down by 10% when you purchase through our link, and you can also grab Metro Awakening for 10% off, both of which are dark and immersive single player experiences. Perennial VR favorite Beat Saber is also marked down by 10% when you use our link, and really should be in every headset owner’s library.
For the more competitive gamer, we found some special discounts when buying add-ons for some popular multiplayer games. You can redeem an offer for 50% off your first add-on purchase in Gorilla Tag, to make sure you stand out while swinging from tree to tree. Similarly, you can score 50% off your first add-on purchase in the serious shooter VAIL.
Students and Teachers Can Score 10% Off at Meta
Students or teachers in higher education can also qualify for an extra meta discount code. You’ll have to verify your information with Meta on the Education Purchase Program (EPP) page first using your .edu email, and then you’ll get a link for a 10% off at checkout, no actual code required. The discount is good for Quest products like headsets, the Ray-Ban Meta glasses, and some accessories. While that program is meant for personal use folks in education, there’s a separate program called Meta for Education you can check out if you’re interested in using Meta to educate, with programs for manufacturing and non-profit sectors.
Refer a Friend, Score a $30 Meta Store Credit
For existing headset owners looking to draw friends into their virtual worlds, Meta has a program for personal referral links that will score you both store credit. In the Meta Horizon app on your phone, tap the “Menu” button, and then go down to “Referrals” in the “Payment and Subscriptions” section, and you’ll be able to copy your code to share with friends. If they use that code to purchase and activate a Quest 3 or Quest 3s headset, you’ll both get $30 added to your Quest Cash account. Check out the Meta official page on referrals for more info, or the help page for sending and redeeming codes.
Level Up Your Gaming: the Meta Quest 3S Xbox
Meta teamed up with Xbox to bring the Meta Quest 3S Xbox Edition. This is a limited edition bundle with a custom 128GB Meta Quest 3S in signature Xbox Carbon Black and Velocity Green with matching Touch Plus controllers, a limited edition Xbox controller, an Elite Strap, and a 3-month Xbox Game Pass Ultimate membership.
With this, you’ll put your Meta Quest on 3S Xbox Edition, where you'll be able to play hundreds of Xbox games on a huge screen, thanks to the combination of Meta Quest and Xbox Cloud Gaming (Beta) with Xbox Game Pass Ultimate, as well as a bevy of other immersive experiences from the Meta Horizon Store.