Millions of people use ChatGPT as their go-to AI chatbot every day, but the competition has become incredibly impressive.
OpenAI's chatbot broke the lid off of the AI scene when it debuted, but it's far from the only game in town now. Gemini and Claude have made strides, making long-time ChatGPT users curious about what's on the other side of the fence.
After Google's I/O conference in May, it's clear that Google wants AI to handle more of the heavy digital lifting, helping users spend less time managing everyday tasks.
And for Anthropic, the Mythos model has come under fire for being "too good" at finding zero-day bugs and has attracted government scrutiny on more than one occasion.
If you're AI-curious and want to try out a new chatbot without losing the context from your previous conversations with ChatGPT, here's how to transfer its memory about you over.
With ChatGPT, there's no "official" memory import setting
Some chatbots, including Claude and Gemini, offer a built-in way to import your chatbot memory from one platform to another.
Chatbot memory isn't necessarily every single thing you've said to ChatGPT, but rather context it's picked up from your previous conversations and things you've specifically told it to remember. Important information, such as your interests or career trajectory, that helps provide context for your chatbot may be stored in its memory, if that feature exists; not all chatbots have dedicated memory sections where you can import or export information, but most provide a way to view what the chatbot remembers about you.
ChatGPT's memory settings are relatively sparse: You can enable memory and view a Memory Summary of what it knows about you. This summary contains context from previous conversations and info you've specifically told ChatGPT to remember.
If you're trying to transfer your chatbot memory away from ChatGPT, you can copy the Memory Summary and paste it into the new chatbot you're using. If you're trying to transfer memory to ChatGPT, you can simply tell it to remember what you want it to remember and that information will be saved -- no dedicated setting required.
How to export your data from ChatGPT
Exporting your previous chats and other data from ChatGPT is straightforward.
Here's what to do:
- Log in to your ChatGPT account
- Click your profile icon at the bottom left
- Click Settings
- Go to Data controls
- Click Export data
A small pop-up window will appear, detailing what exporting your data means and how you'll receive it. Like most chatbots, you'll receive a link to your account's email to download your data. When you're ready, click Confirm export.
From there, you can upload the data to a supported chatbot, such as Gemini.