Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle has some pretty tricky categories. Green is a fun one for those of us who've played a lot of board games in our lives. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Boogie down!
Green group hint: Do not pass Go.
Blue group hint: Reading the news.
Purple group hint: Some academic gowns have these.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Dance styles.
Green group: In a Monopoly box.
Blue group: Content sorting options online.
Purple group: Things with mantles/mantels.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is dance styles. The four answers are foxtrot, modern, swing and tap.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is in a Monopoly box. The four answers are deed, hotel, money and token.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is content sorting options online. The four answers are featured, popular, recent and trending.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is things with mantles/mantels. The four answers are Earth, emperor, fireplace and Yankees.
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.