Airbnb has partnered with FIFA to fill stadium seats for the upcoming World Cup. The short-term rental company announced on Tuesday that select listings in the soccer event's 16 host cities will include free match tickets for games from the group and knockout stages through to the final.
These bookings average $385 per night and will be available to nab during World Cup game dates in each city. Listings bundled with FIFA tickets will be marked with a special soccer ball icon at the top of their pages. For these listings, a ticket will be provided for each member of your party -- whether you're flying solo or going with a group.
"Airbnb hosts don't just offer you a place to stay -- they provide a more authentic way to experience a destination," Dave Stephenson, chief business officer of Airbnb, said in a statement. "And this World Cup, they're doing something extraordinary: helping fans follow their teams wherever the tournament takes them, with select homes including free tickets in every host city."
The news of this ticket giveaway comes amid a troubling time for World Cup ticket sales. Opening day matches did not sell out. A mix of a lack of transparency in the ticketing process, high prices, system glitches and the introduction of dynamic pricing -- where prices fluctuate depending on real (or perceived) demand -- have all led to multiple investigations into FIFA's ticket sales policies. There's also a booming secondary ticket market, where many seats at group-stage matches cost thousands of dollars, pricing many people out of attending.
"We announced our FIFA partnership a year ago, and these plans have been in the works long before tickets became available," an Airbnb spokesperson told CNET. "At its core, the program is about hosts offering fans a chance to get to the World Cup and follow their teams, from start to finish."
Airbnb launched a set of exclusive fan experiences tied to the World Cup back in May. These range from the opportunity to play against a former soccer pro in a FIFA World Cup stadium to hanging out with athlete Rio Ferdinand for four days in a Los Angeles Airbnb in what the company is calling "The Ultimate Quarter-Final Getaway."
Airbnb estimates that over 1,300 free tickets will be allotted to Airbnb hosts and guests, including tickets already gifted to guests and those included in future stays tied to game dates.
A FIFA representative didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.