Computer Science > Robotics
Title:DNN Koopman-Based Deviation Compensation for UGV Path Tracking Control on Coupled Slope and Potholed Road
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) operating in off-road scenarios are confronted with complex terrain disturbances that can substantially degrade path tracking performance. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a deep neural network (DNN) Koopman-based deviation compensation strategy for UGV path tracking control. Firstly, based on the vehicle dynamic function on coupled slope, an adaptive forgetting recursive least squares method with decoupled error terms is designed to estimate tire cornering stiffness. On this basis, a Laguerre model predictive control (LMPC) path tracking control strategy is designed by incorporating Laguerre functions, which can reduce computational resource usage while maintaining reliable tracking performance across different coupled slope scenarios. Then, by integrating Koopman operator theory with DNN, a DNN Koopman (DK) path deviation compensation method is proposed, which significantly improves the path tracking accuracy of UGV under potholed road disturbances. Furthermore, an event-triggered parallel cooperative (EPC) compensation mechanism that couples LMPC with DK is established based on compensation activation criteria and credibility verification. This mechanism improves path tracking accuracy on potholed road while ensuring the feasibility of overall steering command and stability of vehicle after DK compensation. Finally, a hardware-in-the-loop (HiL) experimental platform is constructed for validation. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed UGV path tracking strategy improves tracking performance by more than 11.5% across multiple operating conditions.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.