Computer Science > Robotics
Title:ACE-Ego-0: Unifying Egocentric Human and Robotic Data for VLA Pretraining
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models benefit from large-scale and diverse embodied data, yet scaling robot trajectory collection is costly and labor-intensive. Recent advances show that large-scale egocentric human videos provide complementary real-world supervision in pretraining. However, joint training on human and robot data remains challenging due to divergences in action spaces, embodiment structures, temporal dynamics, and supervision quality. We introduce ACE-EGO-0, a unified VLA pretraining framework jointly leveraging heterogeneous data sources. To extract large-scale pretraining supervision from egocentric human videos, we build a scalable egocentric video-to-action pipeline that converts raw human videos into robot-format pseudo-action trajectories. To make these labels comparable with robot demonstrations, ACE-EGO-0 uses a unified action representation based on camera-space actions, morphology conditioning, and time-aligned action chunking. To robustly leverage noisy pseudo-action supervision from egocentric human videos, we formulate a reliability-aware training objective with a human auxiliary loss that concentrates supervision on reliable signals. We instantiate ACE-EGO-0 on 4.53K hours of robot and simulation data, together with 1.48K hours of pseudo-action-labeled egocentric human data. Experiments show that incorporating large-scale human supervision under reliability-aware weighting consistently improves both unified joint pretraining and supervised fine-tuning. ACE-EGO-0 achieves state-of-the-art performance on RoboCasa GR1 TableTop and RoboTwin 2.0, while demonstrating strong transfer to real-world bimanual manipulation.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.