Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Landsat-Sentinel-2 Algal Bloom Mapping Using Vision Transformers: Model Description, Implementation, and Examples
View PDFAbstract:Coastal algal bloom monitoring requires frequent, spatially detailed, and globally consistent observations, provided by Landsat-8/9 and Sentinel-2 A/B/C. Together, these missions offer over a decade of medium-resolution multispectral imagery with near-global coverage every 2-3 days, enabling the detection of fragmented bloom structures not resolvable by coarse ocean-color sensors. However, their use in aquatic environments remains challenging due to limited spectral coverage and a lack of harmonized reflectance products. As an alternative to traditional bio-optical methods, deep learning-based image classification offers a data-driven approach that can overcome many of these limitations. This study presents the first successful implementation of vision transformer-based coastal algal bloom mapping using 30-m Landsat-Sentinel-2 images. A globally distributed bloom patch dataset was generated across bloom-prone coastal hotspots worldwide. Four transformer-based architectures were compared against a standard convolutional baseline for fine-scale bloom detection, and assessed under different optical water types and atmospheric and surface conditions. All deep learning models showed strong capabilities in detecting floating bloom areas, with omission and commission errors of 8-65%. Under cloud and glint stress in a time series, the Swin Transformer outperformed traditional spectral-index approaches, which produced widespread false positives, effectively avoiding cloud- and glint-affected pixels. Comparisons with MODIS-derived products further highlighted the benefits of higher spatial resolution in detecting fragmented and irregularly affected blooms. Our findings support deep learning as a reliable tool for medium-resolution, consistent monitoring of floating algal blooms in dynamic coastal environments.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.