Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Towards Reliable Sequential Object Picking in Clutter: The Runner-up Solution to RGMC 2025
View PDFAbstract:As a long-standing challenge in robotic manipulation, stable and efficient grasping in cluttered environments is of great importance in industrial settings. While recent studies have achieved relatively high success rates in grasping from clutter, there remain few mature solutions for more demanding tasks such as sequential object search and sorting. This work addresses sequential object picking in cluttered environments based on the Cluttered Environment Picking Benchmark (CEPB) and presents our solution to the Pick-in-Clutter track of the 10th Robotic Grasping and Manipulation Competition (RGMC) at ICRA 2025. The task poses several key challenges. First, it requires robust and collision-aware grasping with high success rates across a diverse set of objects, including both rigid and deformable ones. Second, it demands efficient search for target objects, which places stringent requirements on the decluttering and searching strategies of the solution. To address the above challenges, we design an integrated hardware-software pipeline that combines object recognition, decluttering, and multi-modal grasping. The main contributions include the hardware design of a multifunctional gripper and novel representations for object distribution and occlusion relationships in cluttered space. This pipeline enables efficient recognition, search, and sequential grasping of objects in clutter, demonstrating strong performance in both laboratory tests and competition scenarios, and ultimately achieving second place in the Pick-in-Clutter track of the RGMC 2025.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.