Sam’s Club is a warehouse club owned by the same parent company as Walmart. You can expect the same advantages you get from buying in bulk in a no-frills retailer like Costco, but Sam’s Club is also leveraging Walmart’s market power and vast network of suppliers. While there is a membership fee to join, it’s easy to earn it back in a single trip, given the savings you get when buying in bulk. Sam’s Club is a great option for large families or homes with shared resources, because Sam’s Club not only carries items in larger quantities, but also offers perks like discount fuel prices, free delivery, and cash-back rewards through Sam’s Cash. If you want to save even more, be sure to check out our Sam's Club coupon and Sam’s Club promo codes.
Get up to 60% Off Top Products at Sam’s Club
As mentioned, you’ll find some of the lowest prices on all your everyday needs at Sam’s Club, but they’ve made it even more affordable with up to 60% off clearance items. Be sure to check back often for rotating deep discounts on essentials from electronics to clothing and home goods. Plus, no additional or specific Sam's Club coupon or Sam’s Club promo codes are required to get these slashed prices.
Earn Sam’s Cash for Extra Savings Sitewide
Not only will you get slashed prices on everyday essentials and bulk items, but you can also get extra savings and perks with the Sam's Cash Loyalty Rewards Program. This rewards program allows all members (including U.S. and Puerto Rico) to earn Sam's Cash on qualifying purchases made both inside and outside of Sam’s Club. Once you earn Sam’s Cash through your Plus membership, the Sam’s Club Mastercard, and the Bonus Offers Program, you can redeem for savings or cash out.
Once you’ve earned Sam’s Cash, you’ll see it as “pending” in the dashboard. If you earn through your Sam’s Club Mastercard, it will be issued on your cycle date each month, and Sam’s Cash earned from Plus Membership and Bonus Offers is issued on your monthly membership anniversary. When rewards are loaded to your account, you can use them to make purchases at Sam’s Club, cash them out, or renew your membership. There are tons of ways to use it, depending on your needs, and tons of ways to save.
Select Customers Can Save up to 60% on a Sam’s Club Membership
Sam’s Club wants to reward some of the most valuable members in our community with more ways to save, offering 60% off new membership fees for healthcare workers, like nurses, medical providers, and hospital employees, who will qualify for a discounted $20 Club membership or $60 Plus membership.
Plus, Sam’s Club also offers 60% off new memberships for military and first responders, including active duty military, veterans, and their spouses, and first responders can join for just $20 (a $30 discount from the standard annual fee).
Get Sam’s Club Student Membership Discount: 60% Off
College students who join Sam's Club online for the first time (new member status) can get a 60% discount on a Club membership, or $50 off a Sam’s Club Plus membership. Although there are discounts for both types of memberships, when you join as a Plus member, you’ll get free Curbside Pickup, early shopping at select locations, and free delivery and shipping on eligible orders of $50 or more. To get this Sam’s Club student discount, you need to be at least 18 years old and actively enrolled in an accredited, government-recognized public or private university or college. (This includes college, university, community college, junior college, vocational, and technical students.)
This deal also applies to new members only, meaning you must not have had an active Sam’s Club membership in the last 24 months. To confirm your status, digitally verify your identity through ID.me.
Free Shipping on Orders $50+ for Plus Members at Sam's Club
On top of perks like Sam’s Cash back and fuel savings, Sam’s Club Plus members get free shipping on eligible items when they spend $50 or more. (This deal only applies to orders shipped within the lower 48.)