The Switch 2 is a pricey hybrid home-and-handheld console -- and it's only going to get more expensive by the end of 2026 -- but Nintendo's grip on gamers certainly hasn't loosened. The family-friendly gaming giant started off its latest console generation with a slate of must-play games, including Donkey Kong Bananza, Metroid Prime 4: Beyond and Pokemon Pokopia, encouraging fans to make the switch. While sales numbers have seemingly slowed in the face of tariffs and rising hardware prices, nearly 20 million Switch 2 consoles have already been sold worldwide since the system launched in June 2025.
Nintendo's latest console may not be able to run every game a PS5 or Xbox can, but it's far more powerful than its predecessor. While the original Switch struggled to run games like Tears of the Kingdom and Pokemon Scarlet and Violet, the Switch 2 consistently keeps these games chugging along stutter-free at 60 frames per second. And when the console is docked, native 4K resolution means your favorite Switch exclusives look prettier than ever before.
A couple of those experimental game swings that Nintendo is so well-known for are present here, too: The Switch 2's new Joy-Cons add an optional mouse control scheme, and GameChat finally lets you party up with friends with voice and video chat on a Nintendo console. Whether you're looking to indulge in some of that multiplayer adrenaline or you just want to traipse through a couple of single-player adventures, these are the best games you can play on the Switch 2 right now.
Best Nintendo Switch 2 Games
Nintendo Switch 2 game FAQs
How we determined CNET's best Nintendo Switch 2 games
When creating this list of the best Nintendo Switch 2 games, we factored in how unique and enjoyable these games are for most players -- we evaluated criteria such as graphical quality, innovative gameplay mechanics and compelling narratives. The picks we made cover a variety of genres from fantasy to retro platformers to classical RPGs to racing games, and while we favored console-exclusive games you won't find on Xbox, PlayStation or PC, we also included some can't-miss games that appear on multiple platforms. If you're looking for help choosing your next game, CNET's top Switch 2 list is a good place to start narrowing your choices.