Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Generalised Transcoding Framework for Arbitrary Spatial Audio Capture and Playback Formats
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:This article introduces a unified framework for the parametric analysis and reproduction of spatial sound scenes captured either as Ambisonic signals or as raw microphone array signals. The proposed method estimates time-frequency-dependent spatial metadata that characterises a variable number of primary source components and an ambience component with its own angular power distribution, whose parameters fit the observed spatial covariances of the captured signals. This metadata is used to construct spatial covariances of the target playback formats, which are then used to derive optimal mixing matrices for transcoding the scene for playback over the target reproduction system. The method additionally handles independent rotations of both capture and playback setups. Real-time implementations of the method and other existing state-of-the-art parametric renderers are compared in a listening test using simulated scenes from Ambisonic, spherical, and head-worn arrays. The results highlight perceptual benefits of the proposed framework across a diverse range of content and receiver configurations, particularly for lower-order and geometrically constrained microphone arrays.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.