Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Prospective Coding and Path Integration Emerge as Equilibrium Solutions of Self-Organizing Neural Networks with Firing-Rate Adaptation
View PDFAbstract:Continuous Attractor Neural Networks (CANNs) traditionally rely on pre-wired recurrent connectivity to model spatial representations, path integration, and anticipatory dynamics. However, the biological mechanisms through which this structured connectivity emerges via learning remain relatively unexplored. This work presents a theoretical framework revealing how continuous attractor connectivity and its computational properties self-organize through Hebbian plasticity, firing-rate adaptation, and global inhibition. We show that translationally invariant inputs naturally drive the emergence of stable, Gaussian-profiled feedforward weights. Crucially, anticipatory dynamics arise spontaneously within these feedforward architectures, shifting the activity bump forward without requiring recurrent excitatory collaterals. This predictive shift can be linearly amplified across multilayer networks, consistent with anticipatory activity observed in the superficial layers of the entorhinal cortex. Furthermore, introducing recurrent interactions allows the network to learn connections capable of self-sustaining a moving bump of activity. Finally, by modulating the network with an external, time-varying baseline current that encodes speed, the system adjusts its intrinsic velocity to function as a precise unidirectional path integrator. Ultimately, this study suggests that prospective coding and path integration are not manually engineered features, but rather naturally co-emergent properties of a single self-organizing competitive network.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.