Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:Cross-Modal Knowledge Distillation without Paired Data: Theoretical Foundation and Algorithm
View PDFAbstract:Cross-modal knowledge distillation (CMKD) studies how a (large) teacher model trained on one type of data (e.g., images) can guide a (smaller) student model building on another type of data (e.g., text/audio). Existing CMKD methods often require paired multi-modal data with aligned semantics, but obtaining such paired data are often costly and impractical. To mitigate this limitation, we develop a new CMKD framework for the more challenging setting where paired data are unavailable. In particular, we establish a cross-modal distributional relationship between teacher and student models, which reveals two fundamental quantities governing effective distillation: feature alignment and label alignment. These quantities characterize semantic discrepancy between modalities at the levels of representation and prediction distributions, respectively. Motivated by this insight, we propose a principled framework, with theoretical guarantees, that enables effective cross-modal knowledge distillation by aligning distributions rather than individual samples. Extensive experiments across a wide range of multimodal benchmarks show that our framework is highly effective in both unpaired and paired data settings, improving significantly over prior work.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.