Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Conditioning Deep Anatomical Prior Knowledge for Reconstruction of Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography Images
View PDFAbstract:Accurately delineating tissues and reconstructing their chromophore compositions from Multispectral Optoacoustic Tomography (MSOT) images is a key challenge in optoacoustic imaging. The difficulty arises because light fluence distributions within tissue intrinsically depend on spectral optical properties, making the inverse problem inherently ill-posed. Currently, there is a lack of studies leveraging a priori probabilistic anatomical knowledge to guide tissue segmentation and infer chromophore composition. Moreover, most current studies address these two tasks sequentially, which can result in errors accumulating. through the process. To address these issues, we present Anatomical Priors for Reconstruction of Optoacoustic Tomography (APRECOT), a method that leverages probabilistic models of anatomical structures and tissue properties, to enable simultaneous segmentation of tissues and reconstruction of their bulk chromophore compositions. In this proof-of-concept using in-silico data, we show that incorporating probabilistic anatomical context strongly improves the accuracy of bulk chromophore concentration estimation compared to reference methods that do not use any anatomical context or use sequential strategies. This work represents an essential step towards an MSOT imaging mode that directly provides clinically relevant information, such as imaging tissue oxygenation dynamics or disease-related changes in tissue composition.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.