Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge, especially the purple group. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Workout time.
Green group hint: Outward behavior or manner.
Blue group hint: Anti-war.
Purple group hint: Tool time, with a twist.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Fitness class types.
Green group: Demeanor.
Blue group: Peace activists.
Purple group: Tools minus last two letters.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is fitness class types. The four answers are aerobics, barre, bootcamp and Pilates.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is demeanor. The four answers are attitude, bearing, carriage and presence.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is peace activists. The four answers are Gandhi, King, Mandela and Tutu.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is tools minus last two letters. The four answers are hamm (hammer), jigs (jigsaw), plie (pliers) and wren (wrench).