Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Spectrum Aware Illumination Estimation Using Multispectral Image
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Multispectral (MS) imaging extends beyond conventional RGB imaging by capturing more spectral bands, thereby improving illuminant spectrum estimation (ISE). However, existing methods often fail to fully exploit spectral information, resulting in suboptimal performance under diverse lighting conditions and across different sensor domains. Hence, we propose a deep learning framework with a spatio-spectral feature extraction block, which incorporates spectral attention mechanisms to enhance spectral correlation and preserve illuminant-relevant spatial features. Through the inclusion of an illuminant prior (IP), our approach prioritizes specific channels that provide more meaningful information in an MS image. We also propose a spectral-domain transform across different MS sensor spaces. The results demonstrate that illuminant spectra learned in high-dimensional sensor spaces can be effectively transformed to various lower-dimensional camera sensor spaces without any additional training. To facilitate evaluation, we introduce a real-world MS dataset containing high-dimensional ground-truth illumination spectra captured under diverse lighting conditions. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our method achieves superior accuracy compared to existing models, thus providing a practical solution for real-world ISE. The code and dataset are available at this https URL.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.