Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Efficient RWKV-based Representation Learning for 3D Point Clouds
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The recent receptance weighted key value (RWKV) model combines RNN-style recurrence, offering a linear-complexity alternative to Transformers' quadratic self-attention for modeling global dependencies. However, when directly applied to point clouds, RWKV, originally developed for sequential text, struggles to capture local geometric structures and model spatial dependencies effectively. To address this, we propose the \textbf{P-RWKV} block, which bridges the gap between sequence modeling and irregular 3D geometry while preserving the efficiency advantages of RWKV. It consists of a Local Perception Expansion (LPE) component to expand contextual perception along the spatio-temporal sequence and a Spatial Context Enhancement (SCE) component to strengthen spatial awareness. To validate the effectiveness of P-RWKV for point cloud understanding, we construct PointER, a single-modality self-supervised representation learning framework whose encoder is composed of stacked P-RWKV blocks. Furthermore, we extend P-RWKV to a cross-modality setting and integrate the proposed core sub-modules into multiple architectures, demonstrating strong plug-and-play flexibility and architectural generality. Extensive experiments show that the P-RWKV block and its key sub-modules achieve competitive performance across various tasks with lower computational cost and inference latency. Code will be released upon acceptance.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.