Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:++nnU-Net: Scaling nnU-Net with Prefix-Based Data Augmentation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The nnU-Net has demonstrated continuous success in medical segmentation tasks, which heavily rely on the availability and diversity of annotated biomedical data. However, assembling medical imaging cohorts remains challenging due to numerous factors such as privacy regulations and annotation costs. As a result, data augmentation plays a crucial role in increasing data availability while maintaining anatomical feasibility. Hence, we propose the ++nnU-Net, a novel data augmentation module based on image registration that operates prior to preprocessing and training take place. Our framework was evaluated across five different 2D datasets. In this workflow, image data go through a two-stage registration process, generating new warped images. The transformations are then applied to the respective segmentation. In addition, the pipeline computes available disk space, generates supplementary binary synthetic masks and generates checkpoints. We demonstrate that the ++nnU-Net outperforms the nnU-Net baseline, yielding improvements in Dice Similarity Coefficient scores. In the most prominent cases, we observe performance gains of approximately 22\%. These findings highlight the effectiveness of registration-based data augmentation, particularly for 2D medical imaging datasets and suggest that the ++nnU-Net provides a practical and scalable approach for enhancing segmentation performance in data-limited settings. The source code for the ++nnU-Net is available at: this https URL
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.