Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Learning Predictive Control with Deep Koopman Operators for Autonomous Vehicle Motion Planning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Model Predictive Control (MPC) is widely used for autonomous-vehicle (AV) motion planning, but its real-time applicability is often limited by the need for accurate models and online solution of nonlinear, nonconvex optimization problems in dynamic road environments. Actor-critic reinforcement learning offers a promising alternative for online policy generation, yet its policy-learning process often lacks explicit control-theoretic structure. This article proposes a learning predictive control (LPC) framework with deep Koopman operators for efficient real-time motion planning under nonconvex constraints. To address nonlinear and uncertain vehicle dynamics, a deep-Koopman-based predictor is used to lift the system into an interpretable linear observable space in a data-driven manner. Unlike traditional MPC, which computes open-loop control sequences, the proposed LPC framework yields a closed-loop state-feedback policy within each prediction interval through receding-horizon actor-critic learning. To ensure safety under nonconvex environmental constraints, LPC constructs convex local surrogate representations of obstacles and defines corresponding potential-field functions. These functions and their gradients are directly embedded into the actor-critic structure, enabling efficient, safety-aware policy learning. Extensive simulations and real-world experiments on the HongQi-EHS3 platform demonstrate favorable performance in diverse obstacle-avoidance scenarios in terms of safety, computational efficiency, and driving comfort, compared with benchmark methods such as CBF-MPC and LMPCC.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.