Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Spatial-Omni: Spatial Audio Understanding Integration in Multimodal LLMs via FOA Encoding
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Recent multimodal large language models mainly process audio as monaural signals, thereby discarding the spatial cues contained in spatial audio for sound localization, spatial relation reasoning, and spatial scene understanding. We propose Spatial-Omni, a lightweight method that implements SO-Encoder to inject First-Order Ambisonics (FOA) spatial audio into existing Omni LLMs as an independent modality, without modifying their original audio encoders. SO-Encoder provides spatial tokens with limited additional context cost and improves spatial audio understanding through efficient staged training. To support training and evaluation, we construct SO-Dataset, SO-QA, and SO-Bench from open-source data, real recordings, and simulations, containing 400K FOA spatial audio clips and 2.1M spatial question answering pairs. SO-Bench covers 16 spatial audio understanding subtasks, including basic detection and location estimation, spatial relation understanding, and complex spatial reasoning. Experiments show that Spatial-Omni outperforms existing open-source Large Audio-Language Models (LALMs) and Omni LLM models on spatial audio understanding tasks while retaining a reasonable level of general audio understanding. Code and data are available at this https URL.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.