Computer Science > Robotics
Title:FARM: Find Anything using Relational Spatial Memory
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Robots operating in homes, warehouses, and other object-rich environments need memory systems that can find specific object instances on demand. Object-level memory alone is often insufficient: scenes contain many plausibly matching objects, and users refer to the target through relations to landmarks and surrounding objects (e.g. ``the tall lamp below the dartboard and to the left of the poster''), demanding a relational spatial memory that supports retrieval through semantic, appearance, and spatial predicates over objects. To achieve this, we present FARM (Find Anything using Relational Spatial Memory), which builds, in real time at 5-10 Hz, a compact, open-vocabulary, object-level memory with geometry, visual-language descriptors, and viewpoint evidence. At query time, FARM uses VLMs to parse the query and score visual evidence, while grounding spatial constraints explicitly through object symbols and relational predicates. This structured use of VLMs enables more accurate and robust retrieval than end-to-end reasoning over frame histories or scene-graph context. In experiments on 44k language queries spanning 67 indoor and outdoor scenes, ranging from 15 to 15,000 m^2, FARM improves Recall@5 and Recall@10 over prior methods by 164% and 224%, and a final VLM reranking stage improves Accuracy@1 by 35%, while running in real time. We further demonstrate closed-loop deployment on a quadrupedal robot using onboard sensors and compute.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.