Life is hard, but you know what isn’t? Tempur-Pedic mattresses. This brand’s been around for a long while, which isn’t shocking given the high-quality materials that perform for those that need advanced pressure relief and support. If you’re someone who deals with regular aches and pains, this is a good place to start looking for a new mattress. For those that also want to avoid putting a strain on their budget, now’s a good time to look, as there are several limited-time deals currently running.
Save With the Tempur-Pedic Sale
Shopping the Tempur-Pedic sale is one of the best ways to score huge discounts on usually pricey buy-it-for-life items like mattresses. Tempur-Pedic offers and discounts rotate (but usually hover around 30% off), but I’d recommend checking back often to see what new items are on sale and what new seasonal discounts have sprung up. Some of the best Tempur-Pedic discounts we’ve seen are huge price reductions on pillow bundles, buy two and save 30% on sheet sets, and 25% off pillows and bedding.
Get a 30% Tempur-Pedic Promo Code When You Sign Up
This isn’t the “forward this email or be cursed” email chain you got as a kid. Sign up for Tempur-Pedic’s email updates, and get a solid 30% off discount on pillows and sheets. Plus, you’ll be the first to know about new launches, sales, and everything Tempur-Pedic is up to in the sleep realm. Why wait on savings and better sleep?
Save $300 and up to 50% Off With Today’s Tempur-Pedic Coupons
If you’re looking to stay cool and comfortable, Tempur-Pedic has got your back (literally). Right now, you get $300 off when you bundle a (qualifying) mattress with Tempur-Ergo power bases and ProSmart bases. Just as breezy as they sound, each of these mattress lines really emphasize cooling and aim to dial down the temperature—and from my prior testing experience, they are very cool to the touch. Speaking ofl, you can also get 50% off a TEMPUR-ProAir Sheet Set, which features a moisture-wicking design to keep you cool and comfortable while you sleep. On top of that, be sure to take advantage of more bedding deals, like 25% off pillows and bedding, pillow bundles starting at 2 for $69, and 30% off any 2 Tempur-Pedic sheet sets.
Purchase a Tempur-Pedic Mattress Set, Get $300 Off Bases
You’re one of those “all in” kind of people when it comes to big decisions—respect. Game recognizes game, and Tempur-Pedic’s giving you a deal that’s hard to pass up. When you get a select Tempur-Pedic mattress and a Tempur-Ergo adjustable power base, you can get $300 off the base. Plus, you can get 25% off select bedding and pillows to really go for the full package.
Enjoy $39 Off Bundle Discounts on Tempur-Pedic Pillows
Tempur-Pedic doesn’t just create high-quality mattresses that exemplify awesome pressure relief and spine alignment. It also has a variety of pillows to carry out this mission, because there’s no lack of support happening on their watch. You can bundle pillows and get a nice discount while you’re at it: Get two Tempur-Cloud Pillows for $119; two dual-sided Tempur-Symphony Pillows for $169, two Tempur-Cloud Dual Cooling Pillows for $259; or two Tempur-Neck Pillows for $179 and save $39. When one pillow already has a higher price tag, this is a really good deal to double up on.