Statistics > Machine Learning
Title:An $(ε,δ)$-accurate level set estimation with a stopping criterion
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The level set estimation problem seeks to identify regions within a set of candidate points where an unknown and costly to evaluate function's value exceeds a specified threshold, providing an efficient alternative to exhaustive evaluations of function values. Traditional methods often use sequential optimization strategies to find $\epsilon$-accurate solutions, which permit a margin around the threshold contour but frequently lack effective stopping criteria, leading to excessive exploration and inefficiencies. This paper introduces an acquisition strategy for level set estimation that incorporates a stopping criterion, ensuring the algorithm halts when further exploration is unlikely to yield improvements, thereby reducing unnecessary function evaluations. We theoretically prove that our method satisfies $\epsilon$-accuracy with a confidence level of $1 - \delta$, addressing a key gap in existing approaches. Furthermore, we show that this also leads to guarantees on the lower bounds of performance metrics such as F-score. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the proposed acquisition function achieves comparable precision to existing methods while confirming that the stopping criterion effectively terminates the algorithm once adequate exploration is completed.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.