Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
Title:IMUG-Bench: Benchmarking Unified Multimodal Models on Interleaved Understanding and Generation
View PDFAbstract:In recent years, unified multimodal models (UMMs) have emerged to support both understanding and generation within a single framework. Mastering dynamic, multi-turn interleaved image-text dialogues is a crucial task for UMMs in real-world applications. However, existing benchmarks fail to evaluate this important task, as they are often limited to single-turn or static settings, and typically overlook exposure bias in multi-turn interactions. To bridge this gap, we propose IMUG-Bench, a comprehensive benchmark for multi-turn interleaved image-text dialogue of UMMs that jointly evaluates their understanding and generation capabilities. Our IMUG-Bench comprises three classes: Static Spatial, Temporal Causal, and Hybrid, covering 3,113 samples and 12,034 interaction turns. It also includes dynamic understanding questions, thereby supporting evaluation that better reflects real-world multi-turn interaction scenarios. Large-scale experiments on IMUG-Bench systematically evaluate mainstream open-source and closed-source UMMs, revealing their capability boundaries and failure modes, and uncovering pronounced exposure bias on the generation side in multi-turn interactions. We further explore several test-time scaling strategies, including Chain-of-Thought, Self-Verification, and Best-of-N Sampling, which effectively improve generation accuracy and mitigate exposure bias in generation tasks. These findings provide insights into enhancing the robustness and multi-turn interaction capability of future UMMs.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.