For 180 years, Stearns & Foster has been making mattresses before expanding into bedding, pillows, and frames. Throughout their history, the brand has continuously brought its trademark old-school style of craftsmanship. Now owned by Tempur Sealy, the iconic Stearns & Foster look features hand-stitched details and an elevated design seen in luxury hotels like the Ritz-Carlton. Today, Stearns & Foster is known for using premium materials, hand-tufted covers, patented IntelliCoil technology with an innerspring-in-innerspring design, moisture-wicking Tencel, and memory foam for pressure relief. If you’re looking for reliable, hotel-like sleep night after night for decades to come, investing in a Stearns & Foster mattress is a good idea. This luxury brand is on the pricier side, so we have a Stearns & Foster promo code and Stearns & Foster coupons to make this investment more affordable.
Stearns & Foster Promo Code: $200 Off Base
The Ease Power Base is Sterns & Foster’s bestselling smartbed frame. Rated 4.7 out of 5 stars with over 2,000 five-star reviews, people love the adjustable frame to personalize their sleep experience, with a wireless remote to change their base position. The frame even has a Zero Gravity setting to help the body feel weightless with pressure relief for aches and back pain. When you purchase a Ease Power Base, you’ll get complimentary white-glove in-home delivery and a 25-year warranty for extra peace of mind with a purchase made to last decades. Plus, right now, you’ll get a $200 instant credit when you buy a qualifying mattress with Stearns & Foster promo code 200GIFT.
Get Free Pillows With Stearns & Foster
For a limited time, when you buy a qualifying Sterns & Foster mattress, you’ll get up to $300 in free accessories, including pillows and sheets. Perhaps best of all, there’s no catch: This Stearns & Foster deal automatically applies to your cart when you purchase a qualifying mattress. If you’d rather customize your free accessories, you’ll need to remove the pre-created bedding bundle from the cart and manually add the accessories of your choosing to the cart. Use Stearns & Foster coupon code 300FREE for this offer.
Stearns & Foster Free In-Home Delivery
One of the benefits of buying from a high-end brand like Stearns & Foster is their white glove delivery service and 25-year warranty for even more peace of mind. As a mattress reviewer on the WIRED Gear team, I hauled over a dozen mattresses in and out of my home. I can confidently say it was not fun. With this Stearns & Foster deal for free in-home delivery, their shipping team will set up your new mattress in the room and remove and discard all packaging materials, so you don’t have to do any of the grunt work. They’ll even dispose of your existing mattress and box spring if you request it for free.