Meta personalizes the experiences of 3.5 billion people who use our apps and services every day, helping them accomplish what they come to our apps to do faster and more easily. Personalized ads help people discover content that matters to them — like a local ice cream shop or new hiking shoes — and keep our services free. Businesses often share information about people’s activity on their sites with us to make ads more relevant. For years, we’ve offered tools that help people understand how this works and manage their experience, and now we’re sharing some important updates to our approach.
Using Your Activity From Other Businesses for Better Personalization
We’re updating how we use information that other businesses already share with Meta. We already use this data — like games you play or purchases you make on other websites — to make the ads you see more relevant. In the future, we’ll use this information to personalize other parts of your experience, including the content you see in your Feed and AI responses.
Your Activity off Meta Technologies Control Is Going Away
We currently offer two settings that let people manage activity shared with us from other businesses: “Your activity off Meta technologies” and “Activity from other businesses.” Instead of maintaining two settings that cover similar ground, we’re streamlining our controls and will no longer offer the “Your activity off Meta technologies” setting that lets you disconnect activity that businesses share with us from your account. As part of this update, we’re also expanding the “Activity from other businesses” setting, which lets you control how we use this data to personalize your experience.
You Decide How Your Activity Data Is Used
The setting for “Activity from other businesses” (formerly known as “Activity information from ad partners”) allows you to manage how we use this activity data to personalize the content we show you, both for ads and now non-ads content. If you allow us to use this data to show you personalized content, the ads and other content you see will be more relevant. If you don’t, we won’t use this information to show you more relevant ads or other content.
What’s Not Changing
We aren’t collecting any new data as part of this update. This is about using information that businesses already send to us to further improve your experience. For example, if you’ve recently purchased a tent online, you might see more Reels about camping.
These control and data-use changes will go into effect in the US and a number of other countries next month with more countries to follow. For the latest information, please visit our Help Center.