Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Binary Road Surface Classification Using Machine Learning on Production Vehicle Signals During Cruising
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Knowledge of real-time road slipperiness, or even better, a refined estimate of peak grip potential, is a critical input for vehicle warning and intervention control systems. Typically, friction is estimated through dynamics-based recursive estimators by calculating the slip slope; however, its efficacy is heavily constrained by the vehicle dynamic scenario. When the vehicle is cruising and there is little to no slip, these methods become ineffective due to the inability of present-day production-grade sensors, such as wheel speed sensors, and methods to either measure or accurately estimate micro slip, which is crucial for distinguishing different surfaces. To address this challenge, the correlation between vehicle signals and road surface condition during cruising needs to be uncovered using machine learning. In this paper, a feature-based framework and an end-to-end data-driven framework are used to correlate the statistics of vehicle dynamics behavior with the condition of the road surface and perform binary classification into grip, dry or damp, and slip, snow or ice, conditions. A sliding-window approach is adopted to batch a short buffered window of wheel speeds, wheel torques, longitudinal acceleration, steering angle, and yaw rate, which are fed into a machine learning module for predicting the road state. Validation results on public-road data show scenarios where the data-driven method identifies the road surface correctly even during cruising, showing promise for accurate data-driven friction-related state estimators in the field of tire and vehicle dynamics.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.