Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Learning Coherent Representations: A Topological Approach to Interpretability
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Deep neural networks learn representations where individual features often lack interpretable meaning; a single neuron may activate for scattered, unrelated inputs. We introduce coherence, a geometric property inspired by neural coding in the brain, where neurons like grid cells and head direction cells respond to contiguous regions of state space. A non-negative matrix is coherent if each row (sample) attends to geometrically clustered columns (features) and vice versa, and in addition every sample is well described by some feature and every feature is needed by some sample. We prove that coherent matrices induce a bounded interleaving between the Vietoris-Rips filtrations of samples and features, guaranteeing that both spaces share compatible topological structure. This geometric constraint facilitates interpretability. For example, if data lies on a circle, coherent features must tile that circle into contiguous arcs. We introduce Coh, a differentiable objective function based on Fréchet variance that enforces coherence during training. Unlike sparsity, which bounds how many samples a feature activates on, coherence bounds which samples, requiring geometric connectivity rather than only rarity. This yields not just interpretable features but an interpretable feature space. We validate Coh in an auto-encoder using synthetic and rotated MNIST datasets and in a token embedding of BERT using language data.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.