Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:LLM can Read Spectrogram: Encoder-free Speech-Language Modeling
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Recent speech-aware large language models (Speech-LLMs) rely on a pre-trained speech encoder to convert audio into semantic-rich representations consumable by LLM. In this work, instead, we explore: can an LLM learn to read Mel spectrogram directly without a dedicated speech encoder? We propose Mel-LLM, an encoder-free Speech-LLM that feeds lightly pre-processed Mel spectrogram patches directly into the LLM through a linear projection, allowing the LLM to learn speech-text alignment purely through its own parameters. We conduct extensive experiments on both automatic speech recognition (ASR) and text-to-speech (TTS) tasks. For ASR, we evaluate on the OpenASR leaderboard public sets and production-level scaling experiments, demonstrating that the encoder-free solution achieves competitive performance with only limited degradation compared to encoder-initialized counterparts. We find that when data is limited, initialization from a multimodal checkpoint (Phi-4-MM) is crucial for maintaining performance. We also present ablation studies revealing which LLM layers are less relevant to speech encoding. For TTS, we show preliminary results with a next-token VAE approach. While TTS performance is not yet optimal, these results establish the feasibility of a fully unified encoder-free architecture for autoregressive speech-text modeling.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.