Misinformation about sunscreen makes up a small portion of TikTok videos about the subject, but those posts are disproportionately popular and widely shared, a new study finds.
Wellness topics are commonly affected by misinformation spread online. That includes content related to sunscreen -- a crucial tool in preventing skin cancer. A new peer-reviewed study conducted by researchers at the University of Alberta found that misinformation on TikTok receives higher audience engagement compared to pro-sunscreen content.
The study looked at 971 of the most-viewed TikTok videos about sunscreen and found that the most-viewed videos had anti-sunscreen messaging. These videos only made up a small fraction of content found on TikTok (6%), compared to pro-sunscreen videos (86.8%). And only 1.5% of the posts the researchers reviewed claimed sunscreen caused harm.
Although there are fewer anti-sunscreen videos, these attract the most attention because the messaging is more provocative, the researchers said. Public health officials have been concerned about the anti-sunscreen movement that claims, falsely, that sunscreen is harmful or prevents the health benefits of sun exposure. Among the myths these messages spread include that sunscreen causes cancer, it blocks the absorption of Vitamin D and that it's toxic to humans. The popularity of this content on TikTok could influence viewers, particularly younger ones, to avoid it altogether.
It's not surprising that many Americans turn to social media for health advice. A Pew Research Center survey released in April found 36% of Americans reported getting health information at least sometimes from social media. (And 22% said they got health information from AI chatbots.) Wellness influencers know how to make particularly engaging content, which makes it easier for others to believe the message they're sharing -- even if it's false or misleading.
Experts attribute the willingness of Americans to believe sunscreen misinformation to a wide range of factors.
"I think sunscreen skepticism grew out of a few overlapping movements: clean beauty, distrust of institutions, fear of synthetic ingredients and a general wellness culture that tends to frame 'natural' as automatically safer," Dr. Melanie Palm, a board-certified dermatologist and cosmetic surgeon at Art of Skin MD, tells CNET. Sensationalized messages spread easily on social media because they feed on real human fears.
Although there's relatively more pro-sunscreen TikTok content, experts believe the messaging for this has been short-sighted as well. The study found that the majority of sunscreen content promoted on TikTok was mainly centered around its beauty benefits, versus only 6% mentioning cancer risk reduction.
"For many people, especially younger people, photoaging feels more relevant than cancer prevention," Palm says. Not that sun protection lacks beauty benefits. "I don't think it's wrong to talk about the beauty benefits of sunscreen because sunscreen does help prevent brown spots, uneven tone, collagen breakdown, and premature aging," Palm says.
Read more: Foolproof Ways to Stay Cool While Exercising Outside This Summer
Since sunscreen content has leaned more towards the beauty angle, its skin cancer prevention messaging has been downplayed. "Dermatologists and brands need to say it [sunscreen can prevent skin cancer] more clearly, and we need to say it in plain language," Palm says. The problem is that often the facts on social media sound like a lecture. Palm believes experts can work on explaining themselves better without diluting the science and being less dismissive if a patient is worried about sunscreen use.
"We can say, 'I understand why that sounds concerning -- here is what the evidence actually shows, and here are options if you prefer mineral sunscreen, tinted sunscreen, fragrance-free formulas or newer filters,'" Palm suggests.
Palm recommends experts active on social media focus on shorter videos, simpler analogies and real-life examples of sun damage. That's just one piece of the equation. Sunscreen manufacturers marketing their products on social media often use fear-based language. Palm recommends that they focus on educating the public instead. This includes explaining common terms such as "broad-spectrum" or why it's important to reapply sunscreen. "Show sunscreens on different skin tones, because if a product leaves a white cast or pills under makeup, people are not going to wear it daily," Palm says.
With research showing that more people are receiving their news from social media, it's prime time for experts to appear as relatable as possible when sharing content on social platforms. Sunscreen brands can aim to educate younger people on the importance of skin protection and still speak about its beauty benefits. Even if you're sharing the truth on social media, the way you get that message across is just as important if you want to reach a greater audience.