Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:A Framework for Evaluating and Benchmarking Concept Drift Detection Methods
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Data stream mining is fundamentally challenged by concept drift, where distributional changes can degrade model performance. Despite the proliferation of drift detection methods, progress in the field is hindered by inconsistent evaluation practices: studies rely on oversimplified synthetic data generators, adopt incompatible metrics, and lack transparency in hyperparameter selection, making fair comparisons difficult. We address this gap with a novel benchmarking framework comprising three contributions: (1) a drift simulation method that injects controlled distributional changes into real-world datasets via Monte Carlo trials, enabling supervised evaluation while preserving real-world data complexity; (2) an evaluation protocol for drift detection with timing-aware criteria, including the derivation of new metrics (e.g., F1 detection score, normalized detection time) that are comparable across streams; and (3) we advocate for a leave-one-dataset-out hyperparameter optimization protocol for drift detection methods that promotes configuration robustness across heterogeneous stream dynamics. We benchmark 14 widely used drift detection methods on 7 realworld datasets across 4 drift types (class prior, label swap, feature permutation, feature filtering), each under both abrupt and gradual transitions. Our experimental results provide insights into the strengths and weaknesses of current drift detection approaches while establishing baseline performance metrics for future research in this area. All code and experiments are publicly available.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.