Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Agent Utilities over Generalized Voronoi Regions and their Gradients
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In this paper, we generalize the concept of Voronoi regions, define agent utility as the integral of a utility density over the corresponding Voronoi region, derive gradients of the utility, and illustrate the approach in a two-team example from soccer.
The generalization of Voronoi regions is in the form of so-called Cost-Induced Voronoi (CIV) regions, where the agent state space may differ from the space being partitioned. One example of such regions is when the cost is given by the optimal solution of an LQR control problem. Then the agent states include position as well as velocity, while the partitioned space only includes positions.
The agent utility is defined by integrating some utility density over the CIV region of the agent. This utility density might be the probability density of some beneficial event, such as receiving a pass in soccer. The utility is then the overall probability of receiving a pass and the gradient represents a way to improve that probability. We show how this utility gradient can be computed using the Reynolds Transport Theorem from fluid mechanics, and that this approach achieves similar accuracy while reducing computation time by about an order of magnitude compared to a baseline finite-difference approximation.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.