Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Modular Anthropomorphic Hand Design via Multi-Parameter Finger Benchmarking and Selection
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Designing anthropomorphic dexterous robotic hands remains challenging as the design space straddles morphology, actuation, and sensing properties, and performance metrics span both task-dependent and task-agnostic. Existing optimization methods are often unstructured or consider only a single performance metric, limiting systematic comparison and targeted refinement. While the design considerations of the entire hand are significant, the individual finger properties play a key role in dexterity. By developing a robotic hand platform where fingers can be modularly integrated into a full teleoperated hand, we propose that optimizing the fingers can significantly improve overall hand performance. This approach enables rapid screening of different finger-level prototypes through a number of quantitative benchmarks before their integration into the hand for task-level validation. Candidate finger designs (incorporating variations in joint, bone, skin, and sensor placement) are assessed using both mechanism-oriented and task-relevant metrics, which establish a quantitative link between component design and full hand embodiment. The framework is validated through the development of an anthropomorphic robotic hand with optimized fingers, demonstrating how these fingers enable performance improvements across tasks, including multi-object grasping and light bulb screwing.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.