Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:LakeQA: An Exploratory QA Benchmark over a Million-Scale Data Lake
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Recent large language models (LLMs) have shown rapid progress in reading-based question answering (QA), where evidence is explicitly provided or can be trivially retrieved. In contrast, real-world questions are often not paired with accurate evidence documents. The useful evidence resides in massive data lakes, making search a prerequisite for answering. However, there is a lack of comprehensive benchmarks that require both searching and reasoning over large data lakes. To this end, we introduce LakeQA, a comprehensive benchmark for search-centric question answering over data lakes that jointly emphasizes searching and reasoning capabilities. LakeQA is built on a heterogeneous collection of approximately 9.5 TB of text resources from Wikipedia and open-source government data, spanning structured and unstructured data. To ensure task quality, each sample is annotated by at least one Ph.D.-level expert. Each task requires long-horizon multi-hop reasoning with implicit intermediate steps: agents need to discover the correct documents and then compose evidence across sources to produce the answer. Experimental results on seven frontier LLMs demonstrate that LakeQA is challenging. For instance, GPT-5.2 achieves only an exact-match score of 18.37% on LakeQA. Overall, LakeQA provides a realistic testbed for developing LLM agents that can both find and analyze data in modern data lakes.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.