Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Embedded Graph Convolutional Networks for Real-Time Event Data Processing on SoC FPGAs
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The utilisation of event cameras represents an important and swiftly evolving trend aimed at addressing the constraints of traditional video systems. Particularly within the automotive domain, these cameras find significant relevance for their integration into embedded real-time systems due to lower latency and power consumption. One effective approach to ensure the necessary throughput and latency for event processing is through the utilisation of graph convolutional networks (GCNs). In this study, we introduce a custom EFGCN (Event-based FPGA-accelerated Graph Convolutional Network) designed with a series of hardware-aware optimisations tailored for PointNetConv,a graph convolution designed for point cloud processing. The proposed techniques result in up to 100-fold reduction in model size compared to Asynchronous Event-based GNN (AEGNN), one of the most recent works in the field, with a relatively small decrease in accuracy (2.9% for the N-Caltech101 classification task, 2.2% for the N-Cars classification task), thus following the TinyML trend. We implemented EFGCN on a ZCU104 SoC FPGA platform without any off-chip external memory resources, achieving a throughput of 13.3 million events per second (MEPS) and real-time partially asynchronous processing with low latency. Across multiple event-based classification benchmarks, our approach achieves competitive accuracy while providing state-of-the-art computational efficiency per event, small model size, and high scalability, customisability and resource efficiency. We publish both software and hardware source code in an open repository: this https URL.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.