Looking for the most recent Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle, Connections: Sports Edition and Strands puzzles.
Today's NYT Connections puzzle is a real challenge. The blue and purple categories really make you think. Read on for clues and today's Connections answers.
The Times has a Connections Bot, like the one for Wordle. Go there after you play to receive a numeric score and to have the program analyze your answers. Players who are registered with the Times Games section can now nerd out by following their progress, including the number of puzzles completed, win rate, number of times they nabbed a perfect score and their win streak.
Read more: Hints, Tips and Strategies to Help You Win at NYT Connections Every Time
Hints for today's Connections groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Get to the gym.
Green group hint: Bulls might have these.
Blue group hint: Sounds like a vehicle.
Purple group hint: Computer program you use to pay.
Answers for today's Connections groups
Yellow group: Parts of a workout routine.
Green group: Things with horns.
Blue group: Homophones of SUVs.
Purple group: Payment apps minus a letter.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is parts of a workout routine. The four answers are balance, cardio, stretching and weights.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is things with horns. The four answers are brass band, devil, rhino and Viking helmet.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is homophones of SUVs. The four answers are broncho (Bronco), forerunner (4Runner), trouper (Trooper) and UConn (Yukon).
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is payment apps minus a letter. The four answers are elle (Zelle), papal (PayPal), strip (Stripe) and veno (Venmo).
Toughest Connections puzzles
We've made a note of some of the toughest Connections puzzles so far. Maybe they'll help you see patterns in future puzzles.
#5: Included "things you can set," such as mood, record, table and volleyball.
#4: Included "one in a dozen," such as egg, juror, month and rose.
#3: Included "streets on screen," such as Elm, Fear, Jump and Sesame.
#2: Included "power ___" such as nap, plant, Ranger and trip.
#1: Included "things that can run," such as candidate, faucet, mascara and nose.