Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:DB-3DME: From Dataset to Benchmark for Human-aligned Automatic 3D Mesh Evaluation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Recent advances in 3D generation have led to substantial improvements in realism, controllability, and efficiency, yet the evaluation of 3D assets remains underexplored. Existing evaluation paradigms, including human evaluation, learned metrics, and vision-language models (VLMs) as judges, suffer from limitations in cost, scalability, resolution handling, or task-specific alignment. In this work, we focus on 3D mesh evaluation and introduce DB-3DME, the Dataset and Benchmark for 3D Mesh Evaluation. DB-3DME contains 2,619 synthetic 3D meshes paired with human ratings on Geometry and Prompt Adherence. Using this dataset, we systematically benchmark state-of-the-art VLMs and identify visual encoding of 3D representations as a key factor for human-aligned evaluation performance. Motivated by this finding, we fine-tune an open-weight VLM, Qwen-2.5-VL-7B, for 3D mesh evaluation by adapting the visual encoder while freezing the language model. The fine-tuned model substantially outperforms existing pre-trained VLMs across multiple evaluation dimensions, establishing a new benchmark for automatic 3D mesh evaluation. We publicly release the benchmark dataset on GitHub and Hugging Face to facilitate future research.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.