Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:X-Palm: Paired Multispectral-to-Smartphone Dataset for Cross-Domain Palmprint Authentication
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Palmprint modality offers a privacy-preserving biometric solution, yet its deployment is hindered by the domain gap between controlled enrollment and unconstrained authentication. Existing datasets are largely restricted to controlled setups and fail to capture the compound variability of real-world environments. In this paper, we introduce X-Palm, a cross-domain dataset comprising 6,006 palm images from 103 individuals (206 hands). To the best of our knowledge, X-Palm is the first palmprint dataset providing novel paired-identity acquisition specifically designed to bridge the gap between reliably controlled multispectral enrollment and unconstrained mobile authentication while encompassing a broad spectrum of in-the-wild variability. Unlike existing datasets that focus on single to a few variations, X-Palm addresses the massive modality and environmental shifts encountered in practical deployments by capturing paired data for identities across two distinct domains: (1) a controlled Multispectral Palmprint setting using our custom-developed scanner, and (2) an unconstrained smartphone palmprint setting that is participant-driven, incorporating simultaneous variations in hardware, hand pose, illumination, background, camera-to-hand distance, perspective, and palm surface conditions (e.g., moisture and occlusions). Our extensive benchmarks of 12 SOTA models reveal that while existing methods achieve high performance on controlled data, they experience severe performance collapse on X-Palm. Conversely, models trained on X-Palm demonstrate consistent robustness across domains, positioning X-Palm as a valuable resource for training a model towards real-world, cross-domain generalization. Data access instructions and the related benchmarking codes are publicly available at: this https URL
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.