Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Laplace-Mixture Dipole Inversion for Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Purpose: To develop an automatic dipole inversion method for quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) that preserves fine anatomical structures without the need for manual regularization-parameter tuning.
Theory: The original approximate message passing with parameter estimation (AMP-PE) framework models image gradients with a single Laplace prior, which does not fully capture the heavy-tailed gradient distribution of brain susceptibility maps. This prior mismatch can lead to over-regularization and blocky reconstructions. We address this limitation by modeling the gradients with a two-component Laplace mixture prior.
Methods: We propose a Laplace-Mixture Dipole Inversion (LAMDI) method by incorporating a two-component Laplace mixture prior into the AMP-PE framework with automatic parameter estimation. LAMDI was evaluated on a public in vivo dataset. Its performance was compared with FANSI, MEDI, and AMP-PE with a single-Laplace prior (AMP-PE-L1) under both standard default and reference-tuned settings.
Results: On a public multi-orientation QSM dataset, LAMDI achieved NRMSE and SSIM comparable to AMP-PE-L1 while substantially reducing HFEN, suggesting improved preservation of high-frequency anatomical detail. Under reference-based tuning, FANSI and MEDI achieved the best performance for some metrics, but LAMDI remained competitive without requiring reference maps or manual regularization tuning.
Conclusion: LAMDI provides an effective and automatic parameter-estimation alternative for QSM dipole inversion by combining competitive reconstruction accuracy with improved preservation of fine anatomical detail.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.