Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Revisiting Articulated Parts Perception in Robot Manipulation
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We are surrounded by various objects with movable, articulated parts, e.g., box, handle, door. An accurate and generalizable perception of articulated parts is essential to enhance robotic manipulation capabilities. Building on this need, recent efforts in articulated parts perception have followed two main directions: One line of work uses pose-based representation, which requires high manual cost; in parallel, affordance-based methods extract future object motion from point tracking without additional manual efforts, but suffer from low-quality data. In this paper, we propose a new representation of articulated parts, Geometric Primary Structure (GPS), an abstraction of the part geometry structure to balance scalability and quality. For efficient and scalable data collection, GPS is integrated with a portable Virtual Reality (VR) device and requires only one minute to annotate one object sequence. This direct human annotation provides higher quality than the estimated affordance. With this efficient VR-GPS system, we collect 41K frames for 234 objects across six part classes, and train a generalizable GPS model with a single RGB-D object image as input. For object manipulation, we deploy a heuristic policy based on GPS prediction. Without any in-domain fine-tuning, our method achieves an 73% success rate, covering 270 initial states for 9 objects. Our code, data and reusable tool are available at this https URL.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.