Computer Science > Computation and Language
Title:Routing-Aware Expert Calibration for Machine Unlearning in Mixture-of-Experts Language Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Machine unlearning is increasingly important for large language models, yet unlearning in Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures remains underexplored. Unlike dense models, MoE architectures employ a router at each layer to assign each token to a sparse subset of experts. In this work, we observe that forget data often activates a small subset of experts disproportionately, while these experts may receive much weaker activation from retain data. This forget--retain routing mismatch can leave forget-critical experts under-regularized during unlearning. To address this, we propose \textbf{TRACE}, Targeted Routing-Aware Calibration of Experts, for MoE unlearning. TRACE first detects forget-critical experts from offline activation statistics, and then calibrates retain regularization by reweighting token-level retain losses so that each selected expert's retain-side activation frequency better matches its forget-side counterpart. Experiments on WMDP and MUSE-BOOKS across multiple MoE LLMs show that TRACE consistently improves the forget-utility trade-off, yielding a 9\% relative utility improvement over the strongest baseline under comparable forgetting quality and the best performance on three out of four MUSE-BOOKS metrics.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.