Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:Discovering Interpretable Multi-Parameter Control Policies for Evolutionary Algorithms Using Deep Reinforcement Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:While deep Reinforcement Learning (deep-RL) has been increasingly applied to parameter control in evolutionary algorithms, rigorous theoretical analysis of parameter control remains largely restricted to single-parameter settings, owing to the difficulty of deriving effective, interpretable multi-parameter policies amenable to formal study. We demonstrate how deep-RL can be leveraged to overcome this barrier, using the (1+($\lambda$,$\lambda$))-genetic algorithm optimizing OneMax, one of the few problems where a super-constant speedup of dynamic control has been formally proven, as a representative case study. We first show that standard approaches struggle to converge in this multi-parameter setting, and introduce algorithm-agnostic enhancements targeting action-space decomposition, reward shifting, and long-horizon discounting. With these in place, we compare common deep-RL methods and find that Double Deep Q-Networks uniquely avoid the policy collapse observed in Proximal Policy Optimization, yielding trajectories suitable for downstream analysis. Crucially, we move beyond the ``black-box'' nature of neural networks by distilling the learned behaviors into a transparent, symbolic control policy. This resulting policy does not only offer interpretability for future theoretical analysis but also yields exceptional performance, consistently outperforming existing baselines across a wide range of problem sizes.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.