The final new Kindle Scribe, Amazon's e-reader that boasts digital notebook features and a larger screen, which was promised in 2025, has finally arrived.
The Kindle Scribe Without Front Light ($430) was announced last year, but is available starting today. In the past, Amazon has launched a single version of the Kindle Scribe at a time. But the third-generation Kindle Scribe ($500) came with two variations: the colorful Kindle Scribe Colorsoft ($630) that launched last year, and the new front-light-free version. It's a surprise to see a new version that specifically lacks a feature, especially one as useful as a front light. But it puts the new Kindle Scribe in a similar price range and with a similar battery life to the new ReMarkable Paper Pure ($399) that launched last month. Amazon may be looking to better compete with ReMarkable's lineup by launching more versions of its own digital notebooks with similar price ranges, as the Kindle Colorsoft has a similar price to the colorful ReMarkable Paper Pro.
However, the older second-generation Kindle Scribe ($400) is still available for a little cheaper and with a front light, but without some other features (primarily AI and connectivity, so nothing major to cut back on the overall device abilities). That gives you a surprising number of options if you're looking to spend less and get some of the best digital notebook software available. A Kindle Scribe is my go-to for a quick note or brainstorm session, while ReMarkable's digital notebooks have more powerful tools and connectivity to use as a work tool without staring at a bright screen. All three gadgets have their merits, but I had to find out: Which one was better?
Maybe I'm biased, but the older $400 Kindle Scribe still landed on top for me. Here's why.
The $400 Digital Notebooks
Front Light Winner: Kindle Scribe (2nd Gen)
There's a lot to discuss between all of these notebooks, but one of the biggest feature changes that you'll notice in day-to-day use is the lack of a front light. A front light illuminates the screen of an e-reader or digital notebook so you can use it in darker rooms, and the option to have a warm color light is popular on more expensive models like the Kindle Paperwhite compared to budget devices.
Modern e-readers usually include a front light these days, but with digital notebooks it's becoming a more premium feature. The ReMarkable Paper Pure that launched last month doesn't have it (which is true for the ReMarkable 2 it replaced, so it's not a huge surprise), and now the new Kindle Scribe is only differentiated by this lack of front light. Removal of that light brings the price down $70 compared to the regular Kindle Scribe (3rd Gen), and it also extends the battery life to 16 weeks of reading or three weeks of note-taking. Kindle has essentially put a $70 price tag on a front light.
Meanwhile, though, the older Kindle Scribe is still available and still packs a front light. Not only that, but it's cheaper than the new version without the light. That's because it doesn't have the same software features, like AI reading and summarizing, and connection to Google Drive and Microsoft OneDrive. However, I think a front light is crucial, more so than AI features that promise to summarize my books for me. I'm reading for a reason! No front light means I'm putting down my device and grabbing my phone at night instead to read or jot down an idea (or, more likely, fall into a pit of doomscrolling when I meant to read), and it means it'll be harder to use in darkened classrooms or on a plane. Personally, I'd grab the second-gen Kindle Scribe out of these three for the included light alone.
Weight Winner: ReMarkable Paper Pure
These three digital notebooks are all pretty similar in size. The new Kindle Scribe is the largest, with an 11-inch screen, while the older Kindle Scribe and the ReMarkable Paper Pure are quite nearly the same size (the older Scribe has a 10.2-inch screen, while the Paper Pure has a 10.3-inch screen). It's funny to see that Kindle and ReMarkable took opposite approaches to the border design: Kindle removed the single thicker side, while ReMarkable added it, making the new ReMarkable and the old Kindle look incredibly similar.
That thicker side does make these gadgets more comfortable to hold, though. The ReMarkable is the lightest by far at only 0.79 pounds, while the Kindle Scribes sit at 0.88 pounds for the new and 0.95 pounds for the old. But the older Kindle initially feels lighter than the new model because my thumb can reach farther onto the side, thanks to the thicker bezel, and my fingers naturally spread out more underneath it in that position; my hand did a similar motion on the ReMarkable Paper Pure.
Comfort-wise, the ReMarkable Paper Pure is the most comfortable to hold thanks to its lighter weight and that thicker bezel. The new Kindle felt the hardest to lift, but only a touch more so than the other two, especially since it's so close in weight to the other model. I do prefer digital notebooks with that thicker side to hold while I read or write, though, so the newest Kindle Scribe overall falls behind here compared to the other two.
Writing Winner: Kindle Scribe (2nd Gen)
All three of these devices use a black-and-white e-paper screen that's designed to both look and feel like paper when you write. The ReMarkable Paper Pure has a display incorporating E Ink Carta 1300, while Amazon hasn't confirmed the Kindle Scribe's display base. Both have a paperlike look and feel, but one more so than the other.
The ReMarkable Paper Pure has a little more resistance to it when you put the stylus to the screen, giving it more of that scratching-on-paper feel. It's still smooth, don't get me wrong, but it easily feels the most realistic for writing on paper compared to the competition. I still really like the feel of a Kindle Scribe stylus, though. Both the new and old had a smoother, springier feel to writing on the screen, and I felt like my writing came out a little smoother, too (while the ReMarkable was more accurate to my strokes, for better or worse). The eraser also has a nice bounce to it that feels more like a pencil eraser, while the ReMarkable's Marker Plus costs extra to add a stiff eraser point to the back of the stylus. The newer Scribe stylus is thicker and shorter, while the older second-gen model is longer and thinner. I found the thinner one a touch more comfortable to hold.
I also like that the Kindle Scribe stylus has a button on it that switches to highlight mode, which is especially convenient as a reader if you wanted to easily switch from underlining or note-taking to highlighting a passage. While the ReMarkable is more accurate and has an impressive paper feel to it, I actually think either Scribe model feels a little more comfortable and convenient to use, especially since you don't need to pay extra for the eraser point. But the slimmer second-generation Scribe is slightly more comfortable to write with, at least for my hands.
Reading Winner: Both Kindle Scribes
If you're looking at these devices more as a reader and less as a note-taker, then you'll want to pick a Kindle Scribe. While you can read books on any ReMarkable device, whether it's the Paper Pure or another model, you have to manually download the files onto your ReMarkable through the ReMarkable desktop or mobile app. That means you need to have the PDF or ePUB file version of that book or reading material for you to upload.
Kindles, on the other hand, are designed primarily for reading. The Kindle Scribes both work the same as a regular Kindle, allowing you to purchase books through the Kindle Store, download library books through the Libby app, download files on the built-in internet browser, and manually download files as well via a USB cable and software like Calibre.
Software Winner: ReMarkable Paper Pure
If you want the most impressive range of software abilities (beyond reading software, that is), then ReMarkable is the one to turn to. While the Paper Pure has no front light and fewer accessories, it has all the same software abilities as ReMarkable's Pro line. You're able to edit and annotate a range of documents, convert notes into a typed format, connect to services like Google Drive and Microsoft for your documents, search all your notes with AI that learns to read your handwriting, and so much more. New software features also launched with the ReMarkable Paper Pure this year, including calendar-based notes and sharing your documents with non-ReMarkable users. However, you'll want a Connect subscription ($3 a month) to get the best of ReMarkable's features.
The Kindles do have some handy software features, but those features differ between Kindle Scribe models. The older Kindle can edit PDFs and documents you upload to it, but the newer Kindle Scribe can connect to Google Drive and Microsoft OneDrive to get your documents and annotate them. You can also use an AI-powered notebook search on the new Kindle Scribe that you can't on the older model. I don't feel the AI is a big need, but the ability to connect to other services might be a make-or-break for you, depending on what you want to use this digital notebook for.
Regarding software, there are also storage options to consider for each of these. The new, cheaper Kindle Scribe only has a single 16-GB storage option; you have to upgrade to the more expensive third-gen Kindle Scribe to get 32 or 64 GB. The ReMarkable Paper Pure costs less but also starts at 32 GB of storage, and the older Kindle Scribe starts at 16 GB and has a 64-GB option for $50 more dollars. (There used to be a 32-GB storage option, but that's sold out and likely won't return, since Amazon has new models instead.) The Paper Pure has the best initial storage for the price, giving it another point in the software category.
Battery Boon: Kindle Scribe Without Front Light
You know the story of Goldilocks and the three bears? So goes the battery life on these three devices: one has an impressively long battery life; another, a much shorter battery life; and one sits nicely in between.
You might be surprised which is which, though. On features alone, I'd assume the two without front lights would have longer batteries, while the single model with a constant light would have shorter one. But it's the ReMarkable that has the shortest battery life, of up to three weeks. That is a big improvement compared to ReMarkable's other models, which last closer to a week, but it still feels minuscule compared to Kindle.
My preferred older Kindle Scribe boasts an impressive 12 weeks of reading battery life, while the new front-light-free Kindle Scribe has even more, with up to 16 weeks of reading battery life. The reading is a clear distinction, as Amazon also notes that the Kindle Scribe Without Front Light has three weeks of battery life when in digital notebook mode. But even when left untouched, I've found my ReMarkable is likely to still run out of battery in its allotted time of a few weeks, while the Kindle Scribes will happily power on whenever I reach for them. In the year I've owned the older Kindle Scribe, I think I've charged it twice. The new model has the longest battery life, but I'm curious as I test if it will also last while left alone, like past Kindles usually do.
Which Should You Buy?
The older Kindle Scribe pulls just ahead of the ReMarkable Paper Pure in my comparisons. The reading experience, front light, and smooth writing feel put it ahead for me, but you could also prefer the more “true” writing experience, not mind the firmer eraser, and like the ReMarkable a little more. I think it comes down to whether you intend to use this for reading or for detailed note-taking that you want to access on your other devices, or even share with other people.
The Kindle Scribe Without Front Light is a fine device overall, but its best claim to fame is its long battery life. Otherwise, I'd recommend paying $70 more for the third-generation model (or waiting for it to go on sale; Amazon Prime Day is around the corner, after all) that includes a front light and the same AI features and service connections this version has, or go cheaper with the older version that also includes a front light. Still, it's a good model if you're certain you'll never need to use it in the dark.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.