01inspiration
I love nature journaling. Over time I've developed a style and approach that I like for capturing sketches quickly, using a Pilot G2 pen in combination with a waterbrush. This lets me add linework and shading simultaneously (I dual wield with the brush in my left hand) and forces me not to be too precious about the final result - there will inevitably be smudges and imperfections, and there is no undo with pen!
This project began as a test of Anthropic's new model Claude Fable 5, and grew once I saw the potential to actually recreate that experience in a browser. I love the final result!
Of course, I'm left in a rather funny position: I've 'created' this app, but I haven't actually touched the code! I can read it (it's a rather nice, self-contained single HTML file) since I have experience with the underlying technologies. But I'm hoping that this app is interesting to many people who *aren't* webGL nerds, and so for the sake of all of our collective understanding I've had Fable spin up some interactive demos to illustrate the concepts. You are also welcome to check out the prompts I used to conjure this app into being.
Disclaimer: While I've tidied up a bit, the rest of this article contains plenty of AI-witten prose. I don't like AI writing as a rule, especially undisclosed! Hopefully you can forgive me in this case, since (with some iteration) the AI actually did a pretty good job showing all the key pieces. Over time I might refactor and reorganise it to be more in line with my personal sensibilities, but no promises :)
02three sheets of state
Under the canvas, the painting is not pixels — it’s a small stack of floating-point textures, ping-ponged through about a dozen WebGL2 fragment shaders every frame. Think of them as transparent sheets laid over each other:
| field | format | resolution | meaning |
|---|---|---|---|
| ink | RGBA16F | up to 2048, matches screen | mobile pigment. RGB is optical density (how much each light channel is absorbed), not color. Alpha is white gouache. |
| fixed | RGBA16F | same as ink | pigment that has settled into the paper and no longer moves (section 07). |
| wet | R16F | same as ink | how much water is sitting on each point of the paper. |
| velocity | RG16F | ~256 cells on the short side | the water’s motion. Coarse on purpose — flow is smooth, pigment is not. |
| pressure | R16F | same as velocity | scratch space for keeping the flow incompressible. |
Each frame: the stroke engine stamps gaussian splats into these fields (section 05), the simulation advances them (03–04), and a final display shader turns density into paper-and-ink color (08). Nothing in the pipeline ever stores “a color” — color only exists for the one shader that draws the screen.
You can see the sheets directly. The demo below paints a stroke and washes through it; the buttons switch which field you’re looking at.
The two resolutions matter. Velocity lives on a coarse ~256-cell grid because fluid motion is inherently smooth, and the pressure solve (the expensive part) scales with cell count. Pigment and wetness live at up to 2048 — near screen resolution — because that’s where edges, granulation and fine linework live. The sleight of hand of the whole app is sampling a blurry, cheap flow field to push around a sharp, expensive ink field.
03water that moves
The flow is Jos Stam’s Stable Fluids (1999), the algorithm behind nearly every realtime smoke, ink and fire toy on the GPU. It earns the “stable” in its name from one idea: don’t push, pull.
A naive simulation moves each parcel of fluid forward along its velocity — and explodes the moment a parcel overshoots a grid cell. Stam’s semi-Lagrangian advection flips the question. Each grid cell asks: if the fluid here arrived from somewhere, where was it one timestep ago? It traces backward along the velocity, samples the old field at that point (bilinearly, between the four nearest cells), and adopts the value. No overshoot is possible, because every cell ends up with a weighted average of values that already existed. Big timestep, lazy frame rate, doesn’t matter — it cannot blow up.
In GLSL the whole maneuver is two lines:
vec2 coord = vUv - uDt * texture(uVelocity, vUv).xy * uTexel;
vec2 vel = texture(uVelocity, coord).xy * uDissipation;
Advection alone gives you syrup, not water. Two more passes give it character:
Pressure projection makes the water incompressible. After advection the velocity field has places where flow piles up (positive divergence) or tears apart (negative). A real liquid refuses both — push it and it must go around. The solver computes the divergence, relaxes a pressure field against it with ~22 Jacobi iterations, and subtracts the pressure gradient from the velocity. What that buys, visibly, is swirl: pushes turn into eddies and curls instead of sprays.
Vorticity confinement fights numerical mush. All that bilinear sampling acts like a low-pass filter — little whirlpools blur away within seconds. So the solver measures the curl that remains, finds its ridges, and applies a small force that spins them back up. It’s a knob for liveliness: inkwash ties it (along with the push strength and how slowly velocity decays) to the flow slider.
04paper that decides
A fluid solver on its own makes smoke — everything drifts forever. What makes this feel like paper is that the wetness field acts as a permission system over the whole simulation. Three gates, all reading the same little texture:
Velocity is confined to wet paper. After advecting, the velocity is
multiplied by smoothstep(0.005, 0.2, wet)
— flow simply cannot
exist on dry ground. This is why a wash stops at its own boundary instead of smearing
across the page.
Pigment mobility is earned, not assumed. The ink pass computes
mob = smoothstep(0.02, 0.45, wet)
and scales both its
advection distance and its bleed rate by it. Damp paper lets ink creep; soaked paper
lets it run. Bone-dry paper is a museum — the shader returns the old value untouched
and the pixel costs almost nothing.
Water itself moves reluctantly. The wet field is advected at only 0.6× the flow speed, blurred a little into its neighbors each frame (capillary creep — a puddle’s edge slowly widens), and decays exponentially. The dry slider sets that time constant, from about 2 to about 18 seconds. Drying is what turns a fluid sim into a painting: every wash is a closing window.
Drying in inkwash is honest in one more way: water doesn’t take the pigment with it when it goes. Wherever ink happens to be when its puddle evaporates, that’s where it stays — mid-bloom, mid-streak, mid-swirl. Most of the textures that read as “watercolor” are just the flow field’s last words, frozen.
05making marks
Between your hand and the fields sits a small stroke engine, and it draws everything
with a single primitive: a gaussian splat — a fuzzy radial stamp,
exp(-d²/r²)
, blended into a field. A pen stroke is a chain of
ink splats; a brush stroke is a chain of water splats plus velocity impulses pointing
along the motion. The stamps are spaced at 0.6 of the radius so their overlap sums to
a smooth ribbon:
How the stamps are blended matters as much as their shape. Ink is additive — densities sum, which (as section 08 will make precise) is exactly how real glazes deepen. Water uses MAX blending instead: wetness saturates rather than accumulates, so scrubbing the brush in place makes paper wet, not impossibly flooded. One blend-equation flag, and it’s the difference between a watercolor and a swamp.
The hand data feeding those splats gets shaped, too:
Pressure and speed set the nib. For the pen, radius and density both grow with stylus pressure and shrink with speed — a fast flick gives a thin, dry line; a slow, heavy drag gives a dark, swelling one. On a trackpad, Force Touch stands in for pressure; with a mouse or finger, the engine fakes pressure from speed (slow ≈ deliberate ≈ heavy), which is wrong in theory and convincing in practice.
The cursor is chased, not obeyed. The brush position relaxes toward
the pointer exponentially (k = 1 - exp(-14·dt)
).
That few-millisecond lag is the cheapest line-quality trick in graphics: jitter is
absorbed, corners round off, and strokes get the slight follow-through of a real
brush.
Stillness is a mark. If the pen dwells in place, ink keeps feeding in at a trickle and the spot blooms — pooling, like resting a real nib on damp paper. A dwelling brush gently stirs the water beneath it instead.
06black that isn’t black
Here is the trick the whole app was built around. Put a drop of water on a line of cheap black ink and watch the edge: the black stays close, but a blue-violet ghost walks out ahead of it. Black inks are dye cocktails, and on wet paper they chromatograph — each dye travels at its own speed.
Inkwash gets this almost for free because of a decision from section 02: pigment is stored as per-channel optical density, and the bleed step — which each frame nudges ink toward the average of its neighbors, where wet — runs at a different rate per channel:
// red-absorbing dye escapes fastest, blue-absorbing dye drags behind
uChroma = vec3(1.0 + 0.85*C, 1.0 + 0.15*C, max(0.25, 1.0 - 0.65*C));
vec4 bleedAmt = clamp(uBleed * (0.25 + 1.3*brush) * mob * vec4(uChroma, 1.05), 0., 0.92);
vec4 mixed = mix(advected, neighborhood, bleedAmt);
Read that as chemistry: the component that absorbs red light (and therefore
looks cyan-blue) diffuses outward fastest; the component that absorbs blue
hangs back in the line. A few seconds of this and any wet edge sorts itself into a
dark core with a cool halo — no halo is ever drawn, it separates. The
color slider is C
in that snippet: at 0 the channels
move in lockstep and the ink behaves like lamp black; pushed up, the dyes split
apart.
One more term worth noticing: brush
is a gaussian around the brush tip,
so bleeding runs ~5× faster right under the bristles. Scrubbing doesn’t
just wet the ink — it actively works it loose, which is exactly what scrubbing should
do.
07pressing fix
Real watercolor layers because dried pigment bonds to the paper — you can glaze over
yesterday’s wash without reviving it. A single mobile ink field can’t give
you that, which is why inkwash keeps two pigment sheets: ink
(mobile) and
fixed
(settled). Pressing fix (or d) runs a
1.2-second settling pass: each frame a fraction of the mobile pigment transfers to the
fixed layer, the velocity field is braked hard, and the wetness flash-dries. The
painting looks identical before and after — but it has changed state, from liquid to
laminate.
White ink is the other half of the layering story, and it’s sneakier than it looks. White gouache rides in the pigment texture’s alpha channel and composites over the dark ink on screen. But paint white over black, fix it, then draw dark on top — physically you’re drawing on a fresh white ground, so the new line must read dark. If white stayed “a layer on top” forever, it would bleach everything drawn after it.
So baking white is destructive, the way real gouache is opaque. At fix time, white coverage bleaches the density underneath it — the dark ink it hides is genuinely removed, in transmittance space — and then the white itself dissolves into the paper:
// coverage c of white gouache erases what it hides, then becomes paper
float c = (1.0 - exp(-2.2 * whiteAmount)) * uSettle;
vec3 T = exp(-density); // current transmittance
density = -log(clamp(T * (1.0 - c) + c, 1e-4, 1.0));
08drawing the paper
Everything so far has been bookkeeping in density-land. The display shader is where it becomes a painting, and its core is one physical law. Beer–Lambert: light passing through pigment is attenuated exponentially, per channel.
vec3 color = paper * exp(-density * uInkStrength);
This is why pigment is stored as density. Overlapping strokes add densities, which multiplies transmittances — and an exponential through a slightly tinted absorption spectrum behaves the way paint does: the first pass is a luminous gray, the fourth is a deep charcoal that still leans cool, and nothing ever clips into flat black. Naive alpha-blending, the default in every drawing API, converges on mud instead:
Around that one law, the display pass layers the things that make paper paper — all generated, nothing sampled from an image:
Fiber and tooth. Two octaves-apart value noises (an fbm at large scale, a fine one at pixel scale) tint the blank sheet so it’s never a flat hex code.
Granulation. A third noise field modulates ink density — but only where pigment is. That’s the speckle real pigments leave as particles settle into the paper’s valleys.
Edge darkening. The shader measures the local gradient of density
and multiplies absorption by 1 + 1.35·|∇|
. In real
watercolor, pigment migrates to a drying wash’s boundary and leaves a dark rim —
the single most recognizable watercolor signature. Here it’s a cheap screen-space
fake of that, and it’s doing an enormous amount of the look.
Wet sheen. Wherever the wet field is high, the paper darkens slightly and coolly — so you can see your working window, watch a wash visibly dry, and know where a new stroke will bloom.
09ways to paint with it
The instrument has more registers than its two modes suggest. A few that fall out of the physics:
Line, then wash is the native idiom: draw, press d to fix, then brush freely — your shading can’t destroy your drawing, but fresh ink on top still moves. Wet-on-wet inverts the order: lay clean water first, then drop the pen into it; ink hitting a standing puddle blooms outward instead of holding a line. Dry brush against the clock: with the dry slider high, a wash gives you two seconds of movement and then commits — closer to sumi-e than to watercolor. And the brush ink slider quietly turns the water brush into a loaded watercolor brush, for when you want broad pigment without drawing ten thousand pen lines.
The input mapping carries the same pen-and-waterbrush metaphor across devices:
On iPad, the Apple Pencil draws and your finger is the water brush — no mode switch, just two different things touching the paper, which is the most honest version of the idea. (A side benefit: strokes are single-pointer, so a resting palm is simply ignored.) On a tablet, the stylus barrel button momentarily swaps pen for brush, like flipping a pencil to its eraser. On a Mac trackpad, Force Touch pressure drives line weight. Failing all of that, keys:
b pen / brush w white ink d fix c clear s save png f fullscreen
10colophon
Inkwash is a single HTML file — under a thousand lines, no dependencies, no build
step. It needs WebGL2 and renderable half-float textures
(EXT_color_buffer_float
), which is everything from roughly 2021 onward.
The full pipeline — twelve shader passes including the 22 Jacobi iterations — runs
comfortably at 60 fps on a phone, mostly because the expensive solve happens on
the coarse grid.
This page is the same engine, refactored just enough to run many instances at once:
every demo shares one WebGL context and one set of compiled shaders, keeps its
own little stack of field textures, renders to a hidden canvas and copies out — so
thirteen simulations coexist without tripping the browser’s context limit, and
only the ones on screen actually step. There is also a testing trick inherited from the
app: load any of these files with ?demo
and the scripted strokes run
synchronously at startup, so a headless browser can screenshot a finished painting —
which is how an AI assistant and I checked our work while building all of this.
back to Johno, the human author:
I can't help contrast this project with my first foray into artistic generative webGL stuff - a slime mold sim called dotswarm. That project was a lot of fun, but involved multiple nights tearing my hair out fighting obscure shader bugs. This time around I had the idea, spoke to a computer about it, refined it over time as I zeroed in on what I actually wanted, and ended up with one of my favourite pieces of software ever. All it took was some english language chit-chat! And with a few more turns I ended up with this lovely interactive explainer too.
Of course, this isn't exactly rocket science - e.g. the fluid sim piece is a well-known and well-used piece of tech at this point. But still - I'm excited to see things get to the point where such wonderous personal software creation is available to so many people. (Well, right now the model that did this is not available to anyone, thanks to the USG slamming it with export controls - but that's temporary).
Anyway, definitely go paint with the app. Check out the source code. But also, think through your backlog of ideas for software you wish existed - there's a chance you can make it now. Good luck :)
PS: Here are a few of my sketches done over the course of testing. If you make anything, pretty or not, I'd love to see it! Tag me @johnowhitaker on X.