Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Robust probabilistic measurement of structural-functional module consistency in infant brain development
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Brain network is commonly divided into modules for analyzing their functionally segregated roles for group-level analysis in neuroimaging studies. Here, we introduce stochastic modules within brain networks for a robust probabilistic measurement of structural-functional module consistency (SFMC) in a group of subjects. Specifically, a stochastic module can be regarded as the chance of a brain region across subjects potentially being assigned to a group-level sub-network, characterized as an assignment probability for this brain region. This novel method has two advantages for evaluating inhomogeneous modules in brain networks. The first is that it can robustly evaluate the consistency between brain structural and functional modules whose population sizes are not necessary the same, and the second is that it is able to take into account the inter-individual variability of the modules for the groups. Moreover, compared with the conventional structural-functional coupling approach, our stochastic module-based method reveals a more pronounced decline in the coupling between structure and function, indicating stronger developmental reorganization. Our results using the dataset from Baby Connectome Project (BCP) show that the SFMC decreases from 0 to 5 years old, and is greater in primary brain regions, such as visual areas, while lower in more advanced cognitive regions, including those related to attention, control, and default mode network.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.