Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Safe, Real-Time Active Model Discrimination and Fault Diagnosis for Nonlinear Systems via Differentiable Reachability
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:We present a safe, real-time algorithm for active fault diagnosis and model discrimination for uncertain continuous-time nonlinear systems with process and measurement disturbances. Given a finite set of candidate models representing nominal and faulty modes, including actuator and sensor faults, we formulate an output-feedback, time-varying policy optimization problem that (i) robustly enforces state-input safety constraints over a finite horizon and (ii) drives the system to produce sampled measurements consistent with at most one model, enabling deterministic diagnosis. To solve this problem in real time, we develop a tractable approximation using interval over-approximations of reachable state and output sets, and encode diagnosability via a differentiable objective that penalizes overlap between the reachable output sets of possible models. The resulting optimization is solved efficiently online with gradient-based methods using JAX and differentiable reachability primitives. We evaluate our method on sensor and actuator fault diagnosis (up to 11 fault modes) in several high-dimensional nonlinear robotic systems, including a simulated quadrotor and fighter-jet model, a hardware differential-drive robot, and quadrupedal navigation. Across these case studies, our approach achieves reliable model discrimination in under 50 ms, outperforming baselines in discrimination success rate and speed while providing formal safety guarantees.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.