When I decided to take a last-minute ski trip, despite never having skied before, I went straight to Columbia. Was I shredding the slopes? Absolutely not, but at least I was warm, thanks to my Snowy Summit Insulated Jacket and Bugaboo II Pants. Here at WIRED, we’re fans of Columbia. The brand makes reliable, well-priced outdoor gear for skiing, hiking, hunting, or just a day at the beach. Plus, there’s almost always a deal to be found.
WIRED reviewer Chris Haslam loves the Columbia Konos Trillium ATR as a value all-around trail-running shoe for faster hikes, day trips, and mixed terrain excursions. The plush cushioning and 8-millimeter drop are ideal on packed dirt, gravel, and woodland paths. For hiking boots, he recommends the Tellurix Titanium OutDry, which are waterproof, offer serious traction on wet rock and mud, and are surprisingly lightweight at 1.6 pounds per pair.
With summer approaching, now’s the time to prepare for outings, and if you’re eyeing snow gear, the off-season is when prices hit their lowest. I’ve gathered the latest Columbia promo codes to sweeten the deal.
Columbia Promo Code: 15% Off All Orders
Join Columbia’s Greater Rewards program—it’s free to sign up and you won’t need a Columbia promo code—to get 15% off your first online order. Note, this particular coupon can’t be combined with any other Columbia discount code or deal and expires if not redeemed within 30 days of the date of issuance. Plus, as a member, you’ll earn points on purchases, get free standard shipping, and receive a 20 percent discount on your birthday.
Unlock Columbia Discount Codes and Get $20 off
Once you sign up for Columbia’s Greater Rewards program and opt in for email notifications, you’ll acquire a unique Columbia coupon code for $10 off your online purchase when you spend $100 or more. If you subscribe to both email and text notifications, the single-use Columbia coupon will increase to $20 off your purchase of $100 or more.
Top Columbia Deals for Current Students
Columbia offers a 10% discount for students and teachers. You must log in to ID.me and verify your status to receive the Columbia promo code.
Columbia Military Discount: 10% Off
Active and retired military members, as well as first responders, are also eligible for a 10% discount. You must log in directly to ID.me and verify your status to receive the Columbia promo code.
Get Free Shipping With Columbia Codes
As a Greater Rewards member, you get free standard shipping on all online orders, with no minimum purchase requirement. As long as you’re signed into your account, the Columbia free shipping code will automatically be applied at checkout.
How to Apply Your Columbia Coupon Code
So you’ve snagged a Columbia coupon code. Congrats! You’re on your way to big savings. There are two ways to use your Columbia promo code: you can see the first after you click on “Apply Promo Code or Discount” under the “order summary” tab. The second option will be shown during billing when you checkout, you’ll just need to click on the “Have a Promo Code or Gift Card?” text that lives right above where you enter card information during checkout. That’s it! Just ensure that the Columbia coupon code is entered exactly as it appears, including capitalization and hyphens.