Security company Eufy has announced a redo of its smart lock line into a full line of FamiLocks, each with its own set of access options. Eufy has long specialized in no-subscription security devices, and in this age of AI-in-everything, the company is also finding ways to offer advanced features while keeping data more private than other companies.
These FamiLocks offer face and palm recognition, but the algorithms primarily run on the devices themselves. That means it's not only free (while companies like Arlo, Ring, Blink and Google charge for similar capabilities), but your biometric data also shouldn't be sent into the cloud or used to train AI. It's a more private approach that avoids some of the problems people have when Ring used facial data without permission.
The FamiLock line, announced Wednesday, is now available in three separate models. The flagship lock is the FamiLock E40, a part video doorbell, part smart lock model that uses facial recognition to unlock doors hands-free. It comes with a 2K-resolution camera as well as a fingerprint reader, and it works with smart home apps like Apple Home, Google Home, Alexa and SmartThings. This advanced model sells for $299.99.
I asked Frank Zhu, Eufy general manager, and some of the uses of this privacy-forward lock and he told me, "Imagine parents receiving notifications on the eufy app and seeing their kids arrive home safely after school -- a big relief for the parents." Locks like these can also provide alternatives for visiting family or housecase while you're away from home.
The alternative option is the FamiLock E35, which uses palm recognition, a new biometric I've seen appear in the last year or two. Basically, you stick your palm in front of the door, and it reads the veins just like a fingerprint without needing to make contact where many fingers have been before. It avoids collecting face data, even on the device. This model also sells for $300.
Then there's an entry model, the FamiLock E32. It doesn't have face- or palm-reading technology, but it supports multiple home apps and fingerprint entry options, and it sells at a much lower $139.99.
I've tested Eufy locks and cameras before -- in fact, Eufy's latest cam is one of my favorites for people who want an affordable cam with zero subscriptions or fees. While they aren't always top quality, these security products tend to perform quite well and make good choices for those concerned with giving data to big companies or storing it in the cloud.
A representative from Eufy didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.
Currently, these FamiLock models are only available through Home Depot, although Eufy expects to launch through Amazon sometime during July.