Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Recover, Discover, Plan: Learning Skills and Concepts from Robot Failures
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Intelligent robots should not only recover from failures, but also acquire the abstract knowledge needed to avoid them in the future. While reinforcement learning (RL) can learn reactive recovery behaviors, training a separate policy for every distinct failure mode is highly inefficient. We introduce Recovery-Driven Synthesis of Relational Concepts (ReSYNC), the first approach that progressively discovers and refines state abstractions (relational predicates) from failure-recovery experience to support abstract planning. Unlike purely reactive methods, ReSYNC jointly learns skills and concepts through an incremental dual-learning process. In the skill-learning phase, the robot uses RL to learn to recover from failures seen in training tasks. In the concept-learning phase, the robot discovers new relational predicates and refines its abstract planning model to explain and generalize the learned recovery behaviors. This interaction enables ReSYNC to convert local recoveries seen during training into global failure avoidance at test time. Across four simulated domains, we show that ReSYNC's ability to continually expand and refine its abstraction library allows it to solve long-horizon, previously unseen problems, outperforming strong baselines by over 50%. Additionally, we demonstrate sim-to-real transfer of ReSYNC, where it performs real-world non-prehensile manipulation skills and generalizes to unseen scenarios through abstract planning. Overall, ReSYNC represents a significant step toward robots that autonomously acquire abstractions for scalable, failure-aware planning in the physical world.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.