Play favorite titles from popular game libraries, keep progress synced and jump back into gaming sessions on virtually any device.
That’s the power of GeForce NOW cloud gaming.
From providing access to members’ favorite game libraries to offering some of the season’s best membership pricing, GeForce NOW is making it easier than ever to get more from the cloud this summer.
Plus, check out the seven new games arriving in the GeForce NOW library this week.
Hit Play Across Top Game Stores
Whether it’s blockbuster franchises, competitive shooters, sprawling role-playing games (RPGs) or indie gems, GeForce NOW supports thousands of games from leading PC game stores, making it easy to bring existing game libraries to the cloud.
Connect supported game store accounts and stream titles with GeForce RTX power. Games that include cloud-save functionality help keep progress intact across devices. Start a game on one screen, pick up where playtime left off on another and spend less time managing installs and storage space.
Jump into fan favorites like Cyberpunk 2077 and The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt streaming through GOG. These sci-fi and fantasy favorites support cloud saves, making it easy to continue where play left off. GOG single sign-on and game library syncing — coming this summer — will make that process even smoother.
Explore ancient mysteries in the Assassin’s Creed franchise or team up for tactical action in Tom Clancy’s Rainbow Six Siege through Ubisoft+, delivering iconic worlds and competitive experiences to the cloud.
Whether joining massive, all-in combat in Battlefield 6 or shaping the fate of Thedas with compelling companions in Dragon Age: The Veilguard, the EA app offers action-packed experiences and beloved RPGs.
Find them in the GeForce NOW app by simply searching and filtering by store.
Choose the Screen, Keep the Adventure
Gaming doesn’t always happen at a desk — community members are sharing how GeForce NOW lets them play across their favorite devices.
GeForce NOW Ambassador and cloud gaming creator Anytime Anywhere Gaming recently showcased Dead as Disco — a PC title without a native mobile version — running on an iPhone through the cloud.
As he put it: “One of the coolest benefits of GeForce NOW is I can take the same copy of the game I own on Steam and carry it to my iPhone … it’s super awesome being able to play a game on a multitude of devices without having to buy it again.”
That flexibility extends beyond mobile. One GeForce NOW member on Reddit shared being “blown away” by the experience of playing on Mac through the cloud, highlighting how GeForce RTX-powered gaming can be enjoyed across devices, no upgrades required.
Whether via phone on the go, on a MacBook between work meetings or on a TV in the living room, GeForce NOW helps make PC gaming accessible across nearly every screen.
Upgrade and Unlock More This Summer
For a limited time, annual memberships are available at the best prices of the year:
- $35 off a 12-month Performance membership
- $70 off a 12-month Ultimate membership
Performance memberships deliver high-quality cloud gaming across devices, while Ultimate unlocks GeForce RTX 5080-class performance in the cloud with up to 5K resolution, up to 120 frames per second and advanced technologies like NVIDIA DLSS, ray tracing and NVIDIA Reflex.
Pair these special prices with thousands of supported games across top PC game stores. Plus, with GeForce NOW, spend less time downloading, upgrading hardware and managing storage — and more time gaming.
New on the Cloud
In addition, members can look for the following:
- Embers of the Uncrowned Demo (New release on Steam, available June 13)
- Pro Cycling Manager 26 (New release on Steam, available June 15)
- Aphelion (Steam)
- Citizen Sleeper (Epic Game Store, free from June 18-25)
- Megastore Simulator (Steam)
- OPERATOR (Steam)
- Super Meat Boy 3D (Xbox, available on Game Pass)
What are you planning to play this weekend? Let us know on X or in the comments below.