Earlier this month, five current Amazon employees publicly urged Seattle City Council to regulate data centers. It was an unprecedented act of advocacy by tech workers, and now three of the staffers say they are under internal investigation for what they understand to be allegedly representing themselves as spokespeople for the company without prior approval. “It’s a totally ridiculous claim,” says one of the affected employees, Patrick Schloesser. “It’s patently absurd.”
The three software engineers, who work in different divisions of Amazon and all live in Seattle, believe they are being unfairly targeted for expressing their political beliefs. They filed a joint complaint on Thursday to Seattle’s Office for Civil Rights, according to the employees and a filing seen by WIRED. They accused Amazon of illegally attempting to intimidate and retaliate against them for expressing their personal opinion outside of work about the need to regulate the environmental and social impacts of data centers.
“Seattle is one of just a few jurisdictions in the country that prohibits private employers from discriminating against their employees based on the political beliefs they hold and the organizations they belong to,” says Abby Lawlor, an attorney at Barnard Iglitzin & Lavitt who is advising the employees. “Here, we have legal tools to fight back and ensure that tech workers can be full democratic participants in these important local discussions. We hope the city of Seattle will do its part to ensure that this vital Seattle law is enforced.”
Amazon suspects the employees overstepped by, in its view, speaking about the company’s business without having sought permission. “As we looked more closely at how these employees represented themselves, and how their comments were received by others, it became clear that they may have been speaking in their capacity as Amazonians and not as private citizens,” Amazon spokesperson Margaret Callahan says. She adds that "we don't tolerate retaliatory behavior," and while its investigation is ongoing, Amazon currently has no plans to fire the employees.
The Seattle civil rights office did not respond to a request for comment.
The Amazon employees took to the city lectern to advocate for various regulations that Seattle is considering imposing on data centers. Amazon doesn’t have a current or proposed data center in the city, but several other companies have put forth plans for new projects.
| Got a Tip? |
|---|
| Are you a current or former Amazon employee who wants to talk about what’s happening? We’d like to hear from you. Using a nonwork phone or computer, contact the reporter securely on Signal at Peard33.24 |
The employees who allege they are under investigation—Darius Irani, Liesel Wigand, and Schloesser—say they were each separately called into virtual meetings with an Amazon employee relations staffer last Wednesday. They were told an investigation may take one to two weeks and have received no updates so far, besides being directed to use a speaker registration form that they don’t feel applies to the personal comments they made. Schloesser recalls being told the probe could lead to being fired.
The three workers contend Amazon has a pattern of trying both to silence collective action by workers, including at its warehouses, and dodging public criticism of data centers by using confidentiality agreements and other tactics to shield the projects from some scrutiny. The affected workers say they have received numerous messages of support from colleagues and no internal criticism, aside from in the meetings with HR.
In remarks during public comment periods at three city meetings this month, the workers identified themselves as members of Amazon Employees for Climate Justice, a collective of thousands of current and former workers at the tech giant that has long advocated for the company to better address its role in contributing to climate change.
The employees did not say they were speaking on behalf of the company, which to their knowledge didn’t make any formal comment about the data center measure at issue. Two other Amazon workers who spoke at later city council meetings say they have not received notice that they are under investigation.
Schloesser, who has been at Amazon for about six years, and Irani, who has more than five years at the company, say they felt compelled to join the growing nationwide movement against unfettered data center construction for their own reasons and believe no reasonable person could have interpreted their remarks as representing Amazon.
“I took the step to be public for the first time because I got sick of feeling afraid to stand up for my values,” Schloesser told the city council last week. “Those of us who work in tech have a role in this moment. We want the council members to include us in the process of developing good, equitable AI and data center policy.”
Schloesser tells WIRED he spoke at that meeting and an earlier one “to show tech is not a monolith, and there are those of us who have reservations” about what the industry is doing. He describes the unexpected Zoom call with HR as “horrifying,” leaving his heart racing and mind frantic minutes before he needed to give an internal presentation at the office. “I cannot abide by corporations trying to silence employees who are expressing their right to speak politically,” he says. “It’s incredibly dangerous if we allow corporations to do this.”
In his public comments, Irani suggested Seattle could require data centers to use renewable energy and innovative cooling technologies while also contributing to citywide broader citywide initiatives to address climate change. “I should be able to speak out about what’s important to me, and what’s important to me is that Seattle should be regulating AI and data centers, and that’s why I’m reporting Amazon for violating city law” by threatening discipline for his speech, Irani tells WIRED.
Data centers have become a political flash point because, while they can attract significant investment to communities, they are consuming increasing amounts of power and water to meet surging demand for AI. Amazon has developed technologies aimed at reducing the amount of resources its facilities consume, but a growing movement across the US is pushing for new ways to hold it and other companies accountable to their environmental goals.
After receiving dozens of supportive comments from members of the public, the Seattle City Council unanimously passed a one-year moratorium on new data center construction to allow time to impose new rules on the industry. It was an emergency measure, giving it immediate effect, though the city’s mayor has also said she plans to formally sign off on it.
Update 6/18/26 3:40pm EDT: This story has been updated to include comment from Amazon.