Today, we’re introducing Meta Business Agent – AI that lets every business show up for every customer as if they had an infinite team behind them. Business Agent can be set up in minutes or plugged directly into your existing enterprise infrastructure so you can 10X or 100X output.
More than one million businesses are already using a Meta Business Agent on WhatsApp and Messenger to respond to customers around the clock. And because there are more than one billion active threads with businesses on WhatsApp, Messenger and Instagram every day, a Business Agent can deliver more relevant, personalized experiences from the very first interaction. (Updated on June 3, 2026 at 1:40PM PT to reflect the latest business conversation stats)
We’re now expanding our Business Agent to businesses of all sizes globally, so you can have yours up and running within minutes, responding in your customers’ local languages using your tone. Your Business Agent can:
- Answer questions specific to your business
- Make product recommendations from a business catalog
- Book appointments and qualify incoming leads
- Let you decide when a team member steps in to provide support
- Close sales
We’re also expanding Business Agent to Instagram. Businesses can activate their Business Agent here, and getting started is free. In the coming months, businesses will access the agent through paid subscription offerings, with options for businesses of every size.
An AI Agent That Works for You
Because the Meta Business Agent responds to customers, it doubles as a partner that can deliver a morning briefing to catch you up on chats you missed overnight and provide insights on your threads. We’re starting with a select number of businesses on the WhatsApp Business app, Instagram Pro, Messenger, and Meta Business Suite, and in the future we’ll expand its capabilities to help fully run all your daily operations — like conducting market research, surfacing product insights, connecting with the tools to manage your calendar and providing competitive intelligence. You can join the waitlist here.
Personalizing Customer Experiences
We’re also introducing the Meta Business Agent Platform: a new agentic platform that gives businesses the infrastructure to build, customize, and deploy their Business Agent at scale. It lets businesses connect to a growing suite of hundreds of systems like Shopify, Zendesk, and Shopee giving Business Agents the ability to take action on behalf of the business. The platform provides larger businesses with enterprise-grade controls, guardrails, and measurement built in so they can define rules and offer personalized experiences, starting within the messaging apps their customers already use.
For businesses using WhatsApp, the Meta Business Agent Platform works alongside our Business Platform, and we support Messenger and Instagram as well.
Helping Businesses Get Discovered by New Customers
We’re also making it simpler for people to discover businesses powered by a Meta Business Agent directly on WhatsApp. Soon, people will be able to find businesses by typing its name in the Search bar, or by sharing its phone number or contact card in chats with friends and family. This way, when more customers reach out they get a quick, helpful response.
We’re excited to hear how the Meta Business Agent can give businesses the support they need to succeed — no matter their size.