Fans waiting on Spider-Man: Brand New Day now have something to track besides the film's release date. On Tuesday morning, Samsung teased SpideyTracker.com, a new interactive fan site that it says "brings to life a key element" of the upcoming MCU film -- specifically, a website that exists within the movie.
In the trailers for Brand New Day, Peter Parker's best friend Ned Leeds builds a site to help New York citizens locate Spider-Man in real time. Samsung -- whose Galaxy Z Flip, Galaxy Z Fold and Galaxy Watch devices appear prominently throughout the trailers -- is now turning that fictional site into something fans can actually use.
The collaboration, according to the company, aims to bring "the spirit of ingenuity and connection from the movie to life through a fan-driven experience unfolding online and in real-world spaces throughout the summer."
Peeling back the marketing speak, the concept is straightforward. As Spidey is spotted at live events, in creator videos and throughout the world, fans will be able to follow along. The site features a cute pixel-art styled map and appears to send notifications to keep Spidey-spotters in the loop leading up to the film's debut. We'll learn more about exactly how the site will work in a video that drops Tuesday.
It's not the first time a Spider-Man property has played with the idea of a superhero app. In Sony's PlayStation games, spider-men Peter Parker and Miles Morales join the superhero gig economy using the Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man app -- built by Miles' friend Ganke Lee -- which lets New Yorkers report crimes across the city to the webslingers. The MCU's Ned Leeds is loosely based on that same character, proving that, regardless of continuity, Spidey's "guy in the chair" is a master of a different sort of web.
SpideyTracker.com is set for a full launch on Wednesday, June 17, at 3 p.m. ET (12 p.m. PT) -- timed to the drop of the film's second trailer, which, honestly, is more exciting news than this site. Spider-Man: Brand New Day opens in theaters this summer on July 31.