Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:Vision-Assisted Foundation Model for Solving Multi-Task Vehicle Routing Problems
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Multi-task vehicle routing problems play a critical role in enhancing efficiency across various industries and service sectors. These problems consist of multiple variants that optimize routing costs while meeting diverse customer constraints. Existing multi-task VRP solvers solely utilize a graph-based modality, limiting their ability to address variants with multiple constraints. As a format to represent complex semantics, vision modality shows great potential for encoding diverse VRP constraints. This motivates us to learn patch-level semantics from the vision images, and then integrate them into a graph-based model to solve various VRP variants simultaneously. However, directly applying this approach to multi-task VRPs presents three challenges: 1) existing VRP images lack constraint representations, which are essential for multi-task VRPs, 2) the fixed receptive field of individual patches cannot effectively accommodate varying requirements across tasks, and 3) imbalanced pixel distribution among constraints may cause the model to overlook constraints with fewer pixels. In this paper, we propose a vision-assisted foundation model (VaFM) to address these challenges. In the vision modality, input images tailored to all constraints are encoded by a convolutional neural network. The obtained patch embeddings are fused with graph-based nodes to generate solutions, with an auxiliary task designed to address the pixel-imbalanced issue. The performance of VaFM is evaluated across 16 different VRP variants. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of VaFM over state-of-the-art methods, especially for variants with complex constraints.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.