I don’t know if you’re like me, but one of my favorite ways to treat myself is with products that I know will help me better my body or ease any pain. Therabody has a slew of truly great products to help with everything from sore muscles, to aches and pains, and even has a full-on total body recliner, eyemasks to relieve headaches, and a LED skincare mask to keep you looking your best. Although these wellness products can be expensive, they are a truly invaluable way to keep yourself looking and feeling good (plus, this helps to avoid even more expensive hospital visits down the line). Not sure where to start? We have a Therabody tools guide to help you find which product is right for your needs.
Unlock 15% Off Bestsellers With a Theragun Discount Code
Been eyeing a trendy TheraFace Pro or popular Theragun Pro, but getting cold feet about the price? I have good news for you. You can get 10% off with a Therabody discount code when you sign up for email and a 15% off coupon when you sign up for texts. First, input your information and sign up to receive emails. You’ll receive a discount code for 10% off in your inbox. Enter the discount code at checkout to receive 10% off, and watch the price melt away (just like your aches and pains!). The Therabody promo code expires 30 days following receipt of the discount code, so don’t forget to use it once received. If you want to maximize your discount, just enter your phone number to receive a unique code for 15% off your next order.
Therabody Promo Code: Up to $120 Off Our Favorite Theraguns
Therabody has great rotating sale offers, with recent offers including up to 50% off sitewide and up to 35% off with a promo code. While Therabody promo codes are only for existing customers are rare to come by, you can find an assortment of more wallet-friendly products under $300.
Although the holidays have passed, Therabody still has the party goin’. Theragun has special Holiday Sale offers for a limited time, to help you save big on presents you may have missed this season, or to use on those gift cards burning a hole in your pocket. Some of the best holiday sales include: $80 off Theragun Prime (6th gen), $90 off Theraface PRO, and $120 off Theragun Sense.
Therabody also has a current promotion for free shipping sitewide, meaning you won’t have to pay any shipping fees on some of their most-anticipated new arrivals, like TheraFace Mask Glo, Theragun Prime, Theragun Mini Plus, and more. We love the TheraFace Mask. (Read our full review here.) While it doesn’t give overnight results, we liked that it combines red, near-infrared, and blue light therapy with gentle vibrations. Plus, it has a cordless, rechargeable design with an easy auto-cycle, and is FDA-cleared.
Experience the Comfort of Thermback
The Therabody ThermBack LED is one of the newest innovations in the lineup, which is clinically proven to reduce lower back pain by using four advanced therapies, including LED, far-infrared, heat, and vibrations. These therapies work together to promote faster healing, improved mobility, and have customizable treatment options for quick relief. Although the Therabody ThermBack LED is not on sale very often, I’d check back during Therabody sales events for discounted pricing.
Get 30% Off Therabody With Outlet Discounts
If you’ve been wanting to try these health-forward trendy devices, but don’t know where to start, shop at the Therabody Outlet, where you can get huge discounts on certified refurbished devices. They also have tons of last chance offers on a select few iconic early gen devices. At the outlet, you can find discounts of up to 30% off, including certified refurbished products like the Theragun Prime Plus, TheraFace, SmartGoggles, RecoveryAir Jetboots, RecoveryPlus sleeves, and more top bestsellers.
Great discounts on these bestselling wellness products include $120 off the TheraFace PRO, $200 off the TheraFace PRO Plus, $120 off the Theragun Prime Plus, and $200 off TheraFace Mask. As an added bonus, all of these machines come with a 30 day guarantee and a 1 year warranty when customers register their product, for added peace of mind.
Military, Students, Healthcare Discounts Can Get a Therabody Promo Code for up to 20%
There are additional ways to save on Therabody products. You can even use your FSA/HSA card or dollars on some qualifying products. Military personnel, healthcare workers, and first responders all get a 20% off Therabody discount code; you’ll just need to verify your status through ID.me as an extra step in their checkout portal. Students and teachers also qualify for 10% off.
Score up to 20% Off With Therabody Promo Codes and Holiday Deals
While Therabody promo codes and coupons are rare, the best time to find discounts is during Black Friday, Cyber Monday, and December holiday sales. They also occasionally have seasonal flash sales, particularly in their beauty category, with discounts like coupon codes for $50 off TheraFace masks and 35% off accessories. But often the best deals you will find are Therabody’s sitewide promo codes and free shipping promotions that don’t require an order minimum. With these, you can expect to get free accessories and attachments when you purchase select products from their Therabody gift guide, with tons of deals under $200.
There are also Theragun promo codes for 15 to 20% off bundle deals when you purchase bundles of 2 or more products, including limited edition products like: The On-The-Go bundle, The Complete mini bundle, Beauty Sleep bundle, and The Complete TheraFace bundle.
10% Off TheraFace Mask Glo
We at WIRED love Theraguns and Therabody devices, and LED masks, for their ability to act as a restorative and regenerative tool for all sorts of body ailments. We think the upgraded TheraFace Mask Glo is a smart purchase if you’re in the market for a red light therapy mask with red, infrared, and blue light wavelengths, plus the signature vibration therapy that made the first-generation mask stand out. Treatment sessions range from four to 12 minutes, and we love the cordless design. Right now, you can get the TheraFace Mask Glo for 10% off when you sign up for Therabody’s email newsletter.