Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Decoding Semantic Categories from Picture-Naming EEG
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Picture naming requires the transformation of visual object information into a spoken lexical response through perceptual, semantic, lexical, and articulatory processes. This study asked whether semantic-category information is recoverable from high-density EEG during overt picture naming. Sixteen native French-speaking participants performed a picture-naming task using line drawings. Picture labels were embedded with a multilingual text-embedding model and organized into nine interpretable semantic categories, providing a data-driven semantic target space for neural decoding. EEG activity was represented channel-wise using a pre-trained single-channel EEG encoder over an early post-stimulus window, a later naming-related window, and their combination. Nine-class decoding showed above-chance semantic-category discrimination in all temporal representations. Balanced accuracy increased from 0.562 in the early window to 0.610 in the naming-related window, and reached 0.781 when both windows were combined, with a maximum Macro-F1 of 0.784. Class-level F1 scores showed consistent gains across semantic categories, and sensor-level decoding maps indicated spatially distributed category information. These findings suggest that semantic-category structure is reflected in EEG activity during overt picture naming and that early and naming-related temporal windows provide complementary information. The results support the use of modern neural decoding methods as tools for investigating lexical-semantic processing in spoken language production.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.