Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Active Source-free Domain Adaptation in Open-set Medical Image Segmentation via Decomposed Uncertainty and Prototype Discrepancy
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Deep learning (DL) methods are challenged to demonstrate robust performance across different segmentation datasets due to domain shifts, but active domain adaptation techniques enhance their generalization performance by querying a few samples from target domains for adaptation training. However in clinical practice, target domains often include private classes of new anatomical structures or pathologies that are not presented in the source data, and existing methods implement closed-set segmentation where source and target domains have the same segmentation classes. Additionally, source data are often inaccessible during adaptation due to strict data privacy regulations. To address these limitations, we propose an Active Source-free Open-set Domain Adaptation (ASFOSDA) method which is the first work to implement active learning for adapting DL models in open-set medical image segmentation without the access to source data. This method employs an active open-set query strategy to select the most informative target samples for training models based on Class-aware Decomposed Uncertainty (CDU) and Class-agnostic Prototype Discrepancy (CPD). CDU measures sample aleatoric uncertainty and model epistemic uncertainty by employing test time augmentation in stochastic processes. CPD measures cross-domain and self-domain discrepancy for selecting diverse samples. Subsequently, to boost the adaptation performance by enhancing training samples, a Target-refined Self-training strategy is proposed to generate high-quality pseudo labels for unselected samples, thus combining them with labeled samples for a semi-supervised training. We evaluated our method on cross-domain open-set volumetric medical image segmentation tasks, and it outperformed state-of-the-art adaptation methods.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.