Ever since I wrote a post about the molly guard, I have been on the lookout for those, and I think I collected enough to do a little follow-up.
First, some classic industrial molly guards from a museum in Germany:
This IBM electronic typewriter had a gorgeous perspex molly guard around the power button:
Other machines opted for âsofterâ quasi molly guards that still aimed to prevent you from pressing a button or switch by accident, but without having to get something out of the way first:
Even softer? This below is not a traditional molly guard, but the placement of âIâm writing to the SD cardâ red light was not accidental. Ejecting the card while the camera is writing to it might cause some damage, so the light was positioned right next to the card door and the card itself, making you more likely to spot it and wait:
This one is even more clever. You know how some old floppy drives have a handle that lowers the reading/writing head so that the diskette can be used? That same handle also prevented you from pulling the disk once the head was lowered. It felt so natural, you might not have even realized itâs a molly guard doing its job:
On the other side, these following guards are more of a âyou really shouldnât do thisâ variety â much closer to a disabled state in graphical user interfaces:
Letâs jump into software.
This is a nice situational molly guard in Finder when you press âO and have a lot of files selected:
iPhoneâs âslide to unlockâ no longer graces the home screen, with one exception â stopping the alarm:
Thereâs something about this treatment that doesnât sit well with me. Iâm not sure what it is: The text not feeling centered? The control being circular? The icon on the slider making it seem like itâs a stop button you can press?
Speaking of stuff I donât love, you might recognize this molly guard from Chrome:
This one never felt pleasant to me. You might say âisnât the point of the molly guard that it doesnât feel pleasantâ? But I think one needs to separate the intent and the mechanics. I donât mind the intent here, but the styling is ugly, the message kind of confusing â you donât really have to hold âQ, just press it again â and you also donât get any feedback during holding.
Contrast with this extremely skeuomorphic CD burning molly guard in early iTunes, suggested by one of the readers:
And lastly, something I didnât expect to ever see. Per this issue (page 14) of an alumni magazine of University of Illinois, hereâs the actual Molly with her father: