Want to keep track of the largest startup funding deals in 2026 with our curated list of $100 million-plus venture deals to U.S.-based companies? Check out The Crunchbase Megadeals Board.
This is a weekly feature that runs down the week’s top 10 announced funding rounds in the U.S. Check out last week’s biggest funding deal roundup here.
Big fundraising deals did not take a pause for summer this week. In the U.S., the largest financings went to enterprise software company NinjaOne and blockchain technology provider Digital Asset. The largest deals of the week, however, were for European companies, with Germany’s Neura Robotics pulling in $1.4 billion and Finnish space tech company Iceye landing $520 million.
1. NinjaOne, $400M, enterprise software: NinjaOne, provider of an IT operations and endpoint management platform, raised over $400 million in Series C extension funding at a $12.3 billion valuation. The Austin-based company said it grew revenue over 70% in 2025 and posted a profit in the first quarter of this year.
2. Digital Asset, $355M, blockchain technology: Digital Asset, a provider of blockchain technology geared for financial institutions, secured $355 million in a later-stage financing led by Andreessen Horowitz’s crypto fund, a16z crypto. Founded in 2014, the New York-based company has raised at least $847 million in known funding to date, per Crunchbase data.
3. TensorWave, $350M, AI cloud infrastructure: Las Vegas-based TensorWave, an AMD AI cloud technology provider for training and inference workloads, closed on $350 million in Series B funding. Magnetar Capital and AMD Ventures led the financing.
4. Beren Therapeutics, $300M, biotech: Beren Therapeutics, a developer of therapeutics for conditions characterized by defective cholesterol trafficking, raised $300 million in equity and debt funding. The financing for the Thousand Oaks, California-based company includes $165 million in debt funding from Hercules Capital as well as $135 million in equity investment.
5. Standard Bots, $200M, robotics: Standard Bots, a manufacturer of AI-native industrial robots, picked up $200 million in Series C funding. RoboStrategy and General Catalyst were lead investors in the round, which set a $1 billion valuation for the New York-based company.
6. SonoThera, $125M, genetic medicines: SonoThera, developer of an ultrasound-mediated genetic medicine platform, secured $125 million in Series B funding. Vida Ventures led the financing for the San Francisco-based company.
7. (tied) GT Medical Technologies, $100M, medical devices: Tempe, Arizona-based GT Medical Technologies, developer of a form of radiation therapy called GammaTile that is used at the time of brain tumor removal surgery, picked up $100 million in Series E funding led by Viking Global Investors.
7. (tied) MainFunc (aka Genspark), $100M, agentic AI: MainFunc, the company behind Genspark, a developer of agentic AI tools for the workplace, reportedly raised $100 million in Series B extension funding at a $2.6 billion valuation. Investors reportedly included Sozo Ventures, UpHonest Capital and South Korea’s Mirae Asset.
9. City Therapeutics, $99.5M, biotech: Cambridge, Massachusetts-based City Therapeutics, a developer of RNA interference (RNAi)-based medicines, closed on $99.5 million in Series B funding from backers including new investors Viking Global Investors and Sofinnova Investments.
10. Rylo, $85M, tools for the deaf and hearing-impaired: Rylo, developer of an app for hearing-impaired people, raised $85 million in growth funding from General Catalyst, Canaan and existing investors.
Outside the US
Neura Robotics, $1.4B, robotics: Germany’s Neura Robotics, a developer of AI infrastructure for robots to learn, collaborate and operate across real-world environments, says it secured up to $1.4 billion in Series C funding.
Iceye, $520M, space tech: Helsinki-based Iceye, operator of a satellite constellation for monitoring conditions on Earth, raised $520 million in a Series F funding round led by General Atlantic, at a valuation of over $12 billion.
Methodology
We tracked the largest announced rounds in the Crunchbase database that were raised by U.S.-based companies for the period of June 6-12. Although most announced rounds are represented in the database, there could be a small time lag as some rounds are reported late in the week.
Illustration: Dom Guzman
Stay up to date with recent funding rounds, acquisitions, and more with the Crunchbase Daily.