Our next npm major version, v12, introduces security-related default changes to npm install
. All these changes are available behind warnings in npm today on 11.16.0 or newer, so you can prepare before the upgrade. v12 is estimated to release in July 2026.
Each change turns an npm install
behavior that runs automatically today into one you explicitly opt into:
allowScripts
defaults to off:npm install
will no longer executepreinstall
,install
, orpostinstall
scripts from dependencies unless they are explicitly allowed in your project. This includes nativenode-gyp
builds (i.e., a package with abinding.gyp
and no explicit install script still gets blocked, because npm runs an implicitnode-gyp rebuild
for it).prepare
scripts from git, file, and link dependencies are blocked the same way. To see what would be blocked, runnpm approve-scripts --allow-scripts-pending
. Then allow the packages you trust withnpm approve-scripts
and block the rest withnpm deny-scripts
. The resulting allowlist is written topackage.json
and should be committed. If your install routine runs scripts, you can observe warnings in npm 11.16.0+.-
--allow-git
defaults tonone
:npm install
will no longer resolve Git dependencies (direct or transitive) unless explicitly allowed via--allow-git
. This closes a code-execution path where a Git dependency’s.npmrc
could override the Git executable, even with--ignore-scripts
. This change was previously announced on 2026-02-18 and is available in npm 11.10.0+. -
--allow-remote
defaults tonone
:npm install
will no longer resolve dependencies from remote URLs, such as https tarballs (direct or transitive), unless explicitly allowed via--allow-remote
. This flag is available in npm 11.15.0+. The related--allow-file
and--allow-directory
flags are not changing their defaults in v12.
Upgrade to npm 11.16.0 or later, run your normal install, and review the warnings. Use npm approve-scripts --allow-scripts-pending
to see which packages have scripts, approve the ones you trust, and commit the updated package.json
. After that, only the scripts you approved keep running once you upgrade. Anything you leave unapproved will stop. More details are available in our docs at npm approve-scripts
, npm deny-scripts
, and allow-scripts
config (for npx
and global installs). Please share your comments and questions in our community discussion.