Amazon Prime Day is one of the most reliable ways to save on Apple devices. Apple gadgets go on sale pretty often, but Prime Day brings the broadest opportunities, with deals and discounts on basically every iteration of Apple gear worth buying. We test Apple year-round at WIRED and have hunted down the best discounts on the gear we'd recommend to our friends and family members. If you're in the market for new AirPods, an iPad, or maybe just a new case or MagSafe accessory, you'll find our favorite discounts below.
Feel free to check out our list of the Absolute Best Prime Day Deals.
Best Apple Device Deals
The best iPad goes on sale pretty often, but we still think it's worth purchasing, especially if you just want a solid tablet and don't need it for heavy editing or gaming. There's a solid chance that iPad will get upgraded again this fall, but we don't expect anything too major to come for the base iPad, and this price is right. The 11th-generation iPad has a modern design, two 12-MP cameras, and USB-C charging. Note that this iPad does not support Apple Intelligence, so if you're trying to avoid AI, this is one way to do it.
The best Apple Watch overall has every feature you could want in a smartwatch (aside from satellite messaging, but I presume that isn't a dealbreaker for most of you). There's blood oxygen sensing, sleep tracking, electrocardiogram reading capabilities, and high blood pressure notifications. Best of all, the battery lasts for a full 24 hours, and it'll get watchOS 27.
This is the best value Apple Watch. It's compatible with the latest watchOS and has several basic fitness features, though it lacks the extended battery life and some of the more high-tech tracking capabilities of the more-expensive Watch 11. But if you don't need blood oxygen or ECG readings, and you don't need a super-bright display, this affordable smartwatch is a smart buy.
Best MagSafe and Accessory Deals
MagSafe wallets are sometimes fiddly or flimsy, and this is neither. Slide in up to three cards, and pop them out with the press of your thumb. They stay secure when you don't need them and are easy to access at the register. This wallet isn't too hard on the eyes, either.
Best Apple Case Deals
Mous' Limitless case is gorgeous, and it's one of our favorites for the iPhone 17. We like the various textures and colors, which feel pleasant and remain protective. The Camera Control button is an actual button, and every pressable component is nice and snappy.