Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Noise-Driven Instrument Based on Coherent Quantum and Stochastic Oscillator Models
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In recent years, emerging research at the intersection of quantum physics and sound synthesis has opened new conceptual and technical possibilities for instrument design and sonic exploration. This study investigates the potential of formal analogies between quantum systems and classically non-deterministic systems for the generation of tangible acoustic phenomena. Specifically, it explores how quantum mechanical concepts can serve not only as metaphors but as operative frameworks in the design of new musical tools. Building on recent theoretical work on stochastic string excitation, we present the design, fabrication, and spectral characterization of a custom-built noise-driven electroacoustic string instrument. The system implements open-loop stochastic electromagnetic actuation without feedback or pitch stabilization. We show that this excitation strategy produces a dense and uniformly distributed spectral regime that differs from conventional deterministic string excitation. This work contributes to a growing field of quantum music creation by offering a hybrid artistic-scientific platform with potential applications in live performance, experimental composition, and science education.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.