Computer Science > Robotics
Title:Self-Improving VLA Policies: Selected Diffusion Noise for Spurious-Robust Action Smoothing
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Diffusion-based Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policies enable strong generalization in robotic manipulation, but remain sensitive to spurious visual correlations and noisy action generation, leading to brittle behavior under perturbations. We introduce Selected Diffusion Noise (SDN), a simple, training-free test-time method that improves both robustness and success rate by leveraging the diffusion noise space as a controllable degree of freedom. SDN dynamically samples noise vectors that are maximally separated from a reference set to mitigate reliance on spurious cues, while selecting candidates that yield more coherent action trajectories. This dual objective encourages stable behavior even under object-masked observations and reduces action jitter without modifying model parameters. We evaluate SDN on two simulation benchmarks (Google Robot, Widow-X) and two real-world robotic datasets across multiple VLA policies, including pi_0, Groot-N1.5, and Groot-N1.6. SDN consistently improves success rates by +8% in simulation and +10% in real-world settings, while producing smoother and more stable actions. Our results highlight that diffusion noise selection can serve as an effective and general mechanism for enhancing VLA policies at test time.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.