Looking for the most recent regular Connections answers? Click here for today's Connections hints, as well as our daily answers and hints for The New York Times Mini Crossword, Wordle and Strands puzzles.
Today's Connections: Sports Edition is a tough one. If you're struggling with the puzzle but still want to solve it, read on for hints and the answers.
Connections: Sports Edition is published by The Athletic, the subscription-based sports journalism site owned by The Times. It doesn't appear in the NYT Games app, but it does in The Athletic's own app. Or you can play it for free online.
Read more: NYT Connections: Sports Edition Puzzle Comes Out of Beta
Hints for today's Connections: Sports Edition groups
Here are four hints for the groupings in today's Connections: Sports Edition puzzle, ranked from the easiest yellow group to the tough (and sometimes bizarre) purple group.
Yellow group hint: Cleveland is another one.
Green group hint: Rebound.
Blue group hint: Husky and Huntington Bank also fit this group.
Purple group hint: Look for a letter that's not pronounced.
Answers for today's Connections: Sports Edition groups
Yellow group: AL Central teams.
Green group: Deflection off a surface.
Blue group: Big Ten football stadiums.
Purple group: Ends in a silent T.
Read more: Wordle Cheat Sheet: Here Are the Most Popular Letters Used in English Words
What are today's Connections: Sports Edition answers?
The yellow words in today's Connections
The theme is AL Central teams. The four answers are Chicago, Detroit, Kansas City and Minnesota.
The green words in today's Connections
The theme is deflection off a surface. The four answers are bounce, carom, glance and richochet.
The blue words in today's Connections
The theme is Big Ten football stadiums. The four answers are Autzen, Camp Randall, Kinnick and Michigan.
The purple words in today's Connections
The theme is ends in a silent T. The four answers are croquet, debut, Garrett Crochet and Rudy Gobert.
Toughest Connections: Sports Edition categories
The Connections: Sports Edition puzzle can be tough, but it really depends on which sports you know the most about. My husband aces anything having to do with Formula 1, my best friend is a hockey buff, and I can answer any question about Minnesota teams.
That said, it's hard to pick the toughest Connections categories, but here are some I found exceptionally mind-blowing.
#1: Serie A Clubs. Answers: Atalanta, Juventus, Lazio, Roma.
#2: WNBA MVPs. Answers: Catchings, Delle Donne, Fowles and Stewart.
#3: Premier League team nicknames. Answers: Bees, Cherries, Foxes and Hammers.
#4: Homophones of NBA player names. Answers: Barns, Connect, Heart and Hero.