Statistics > Machine Learning
Title:Improving the sharpness in neural network-based parametric post-processing of ensemble forecasts
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Statistical post-processing has proven to be an effective tool in improving ensemble forecast of different weather variables. Case studies show that post-processing can remedy the typically underdispersive and potentially biased behaviour of the ensemble while optimizing a proper scoring rule expressing the forecast skill. The price of these positive effects is generally a deterioration in sharpness; the width of the central prediction intervals and the uncertainty of the predictions are increasing, especially for shorter lead times. This work aims to reduce the extent of the latter phenomenon for neural network-based parametric post-processing methods by extending the network's loss function with a penalty term. We demonstrate the effect of the proposed technique for 2m temperature ensemble forecasts of the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts downloaded from the EUPPBench benchmark dataset and verified against synoptic observations. Here, the predictive distribution is Gaussian, and we use the continuous ranked probability score (CRPS) as loss function. The case studies confirm a substantial relative decrease ($8.2\%-12.5\%$) in the width of the nominal central prediction interval compared to the width of the predictive distribution computed without the penalty term, while there is no deterioration in the mean CRPS of probabilistic forecasts and in the RMSE of the predictive mean.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.