Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Audio and Speech Processing
Title:Unified Audio Generation and Editing via Joint Condition Modeling and Progressive Training
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:With the growing focus on audio in multimedia applications, numerous advanced works on audio generation have emerged. Existing studies typically treat text-to-audio (TTA) and other related audio generation tasks, such as instruction-based audio editing, as independent challenges, adopting task-specific architectures or modules. This absence of a unified modeling paradigm substantially increases the overhead and complexity of building a system for both audio generation and editing, while also leading to limited scalability. To address this issue, we introduce AudioWeave, a unified model for TTA and audio editing without additional task-specific components. Specifically, we propose a joint condition modeling approach with a factorized position embedding, enabling the diffusion transformer backbone to operate under heterogeneous inputs of TTA and audio editing. We further propose a progressive multistage training strategy to mitigate task competition and catastrophic forgetting caused by interference among multiple tasks. This in turn helps maintain the performance of each individual task and may even lead to improvements in certain aspects. Experimental results on TTA task and six audio editing tasks show that our unified model achieves competitive performance with task-specific models, laying a groundwork for further exploration of unified audio generation models.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.