Quantitative Biology > Neurons and Cognition
Title:Phase model analysis of the effect of M-current on neural synchrony in hippocampal networks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Neural assemblies, transiently coordinated groups of neurons, observed in the hippocampus are thought to underlie the formation of episodic memories. Acetylcholine (ACh), a neuromodulator, that is received by the hippocampus, plays a critical role in memory and learning. A well supported hypothesis suggests that high levels of ACh during active exploration and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep promote memory encoding, while low levels during quiet waking and slow-wave sleep (SWS) support memory consolidation. We study this bidirectional role of ACh in neural assembly formation through its effect on the synchrony among neurons. We consider a network model of pyramidal neurons, each equipped with a slow, voltage-dependent, non-inactivating potassium current (M-current), which is downregulated in the presence of ACh. Neural assemblies are represented as cluster solutions to this system. Using a one-dimensional phase model reduction of a pair of weakly coupled pyramidal neurons under different levels of the M-current, we predict the symmetric cluster solutions that may emerge in larger networks equipped with all-to-all globally homogeneous, symmetric distance-dependent and nearest-neighbours coupling architectures. We find that under low ACh conditions, the network can fully synchronize, whereas high levels can desynchronize the network into multiple stable symmetric cluster solutions representing distinct neural assemblies.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.