Computer Science > Machine Learning
Title:CL-DMDF:Dynamic Multimodal Data Fusion Model Based on Contrastive Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Multimodal data fusion involves integrating and analyzing information from multiple modalities to uncover latent correlations and complementary patterns, thereby enhancing data processing and decision-making. While existing methods for structured multimodal inputs are typically designed around specific tasks and assume fully observed modalities, real-world applications often suffer from uncertain or missing modality inputs due to various factors. Some traditional models overly emphasize local interactions within missing modalities, neglecting the global complementary cues embedded in multimodal representations. To overcome these limitations, we propose a Dynamic Multimodal Data Fusion model based on Contrastive Learning (CL-DMDF). CL-DMDF introduces a novel attention mechanism that operates across both feature and modality dimensions to compute reliable attention scores, effectively reflecting importance at each level. The CL-DMDF further incorporates an entity-centroid contrastive learning module that constructs centroid-based positive samples from entity features to enhance discriminative learning. Additionally, an adaptive fusion module is employed to improve the efficiency and accuracy of dynamic fusion strategies. Extensive experiments conducted on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the CL-DMDF across diverse multimodal fusion tasks.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.