Computer Science > Robotics
Title:A High-accuracy Event-based Underwater SLAM System
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:While event cameras offer immense potential for underwater SLAM, existing Time Surface (TS)-based methods prove highly unreliable when deployed underwater. Fluctuating camera velocities severely degrade TS imaging quality, while wide stereo baselines and repetitive underwater textures induce critical matching failures, frequently triggering system failure. To overcome these challenges, we develop the first high-accuracy event-based underwater stereo SLAM system. A structure-aware metric for TS is designed based on structure tensor coherence and gradients to quantitatively evaluate TS structural information density. By decoupling the optimal TS generation into two distinct stages based on system initialization, Bayesian Optimization(BO) first predicts an optimal prior TS sequentially before initialization while we set an asynchronous online local searching method periodically to obtain appropriate TS in real-time during the tracking stage. We use the prior disparity to guarantee precise data association and "latest-observation-first'' triangulation mechanism to realize stable triangulation. As a benchmark for these solutions and a resource for the community, we also contribute UWE, the first high-quality real-world underwater event dataset containing variable camera motions, complex textures and different trajectory features. Extensive evaluations on public datasets and UWE show the competitive accuracy performance of the proposed SLAM system compared to the state-of-the-art event-based method. The code and data will be open-sourced.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.