Electrical Engineering and Systems Science > Image and Video Processing
Title:Plug-and-Play image restoration with Stochastic deNOising REgularization
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Plug-and-Play (PnP) algorithms are a class of iterative algorithms that address image inverse problems by combining a physical model and a deep neural network for regularization. Even if they produce impressive image restoration results, these algorithms rely on a non-standard use of a denoiser on images that are less and less noisy along the iterations, which contrasts with recent algorithms based on Diffusion Models (DM), where the denoiser is applied only on re-noised images. We propose a new PnP framework, called Stochastic deNOising REgularization (SNORE), which applies the denoiser only on images with noise of the adequate level. It is based on an explicit stochastic regularization, which leads to a stochastic gradient descent algorithm to solve ill-posed inverse problems. A convergence analysis of this algorithm and its annealing extension is provided. Experimentally, we prove that SNORE is competitive with respect to state-of-the-art methods on deblurring and inpainting tasks, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Submission history
From: Marien Renaud [view email][v1] Thu, 1 Feb 2024 18:05:47 UTC (46,748 KB)
[v2] Fri, 5 Apr 2024 14:57:56 UTC (48,569 KB)
[v3] Wed, 11 Jun 2025 07:55:26 UTC (42,072 KB)
[v4] Thu, 11 Jun 2026 09:31:15 UTC (34,194 KB)
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.