I've recently introduced a few friends to the power of a great robot vacuum. One of my friends calls hers a marriage saver, while the other was both thrilled and horrified by how many stains the vacuum's AI found on her floors. Personally, my robot vacuums keep me from wanting to set the litter box on fire, since my cat is on a mission to create his own navigational trail of litter through my home.
The best robot vacuums these days aren't just vacuuming your floors, nor are they blindly bumping around your house like they used to. These gadgets are mopping, scrubbing away stains, lifting themselves off of obstacles, and even reminding you to clean the dirtier areas in your home more frequently. A good robot vacuum can cost a pretty penny, but it doesn't have to, depending on what you're looking for. Curious what's the best model for you? I've been testing every new robot vacuum I can in my three-story home filled with three adults, a preschooler, and a cat who's on a mission to get litter all over the house.
Here are the best robot vacuum cleaners I've tried this year, and everything we really liked from recent years. Looking for more vacuum ideas? Don't miss our guides to the Best Dyson Vacuums, Best Cordless Vacuums, Best Vacuums for Pet Hair, Best Carpet Cleaners, and Best Vacuums.
Updated June 2026: I've added testing notes on the Mova P10 Pro Ultra Gen2 and Eufy S2 to a new section, Other Robot Vacuums We've Tested. Next I'll be testing the Dreame L60 Pro Ultra. Also, my top robot vacuum picks are both on sale ahead of Amazon Prime Day.
The Best Robot Vacuums
- What's a Robot Vacuum?
- Can You Use Robot Vacuums on All Kinds of Floors?
- What Will Your Robot Vacuum Need?
- How Often to Maintain Your Robot Vacuum
- The Best Robot Vacuums of 2026
- Honorable Mentions
- Other Robot Vacuums We’ve Tested
- How I Test Robot Vacuums
- Frequently Asked Questions
- Do You Still Need a Regular Vacuum if You Have a Robot Vacuum?
- Do You Need a Self-Emptying Dock?
What’s a Robot Vacuum?
A robot vacuum is an automated vacuum, usually shaped like a round disc, that moves around your house to vacuum (and mop, as many models these days include mopping) on your behalf. You might've heard some call these devices a "Roomba," which is the brand that made the concept popular, but today just about every cleaning brand—from high-end Dyson to affordable Bissell—makes some kind of robot vacuum. They come with either a charging station or a larger docking station that can self-empty.
Can You Use Robot Vacuums on All Kinds of Floors?
You can, especially since there are so many mopping models now to better clean hard flooring. You can use these devices on anything from hardwood to LVP and tile, though I wouldn't recommend leaving smaller rugs out for these autonomous gadgets to get stuck on. Large, set rugs are fine, but bathroom and kitchen mats or any thin, easily moved rugs should be cleared out of the way and put in the wash instead of vacuumed by your robot vac.
What Will Your Robot Vacuum Need?
There are a few things most robot vacuums will need to work properly:
- Space around the base station. Many robot vacuum manuals recommend at least a foot of clearance on three of the four sides of the vacuum's base station to ensure it has room to return home.
- A good Wi-Fi signal. If your robot vacuum connects to Wi-Fi, as many do these days for app control and software updates, it'll need a strong connection wherever it's placed. Most of them can only connect to the 2.4 GHz wireless band, so make sure you have that (and choose only that band when you're setting up if your Wi-Fi shows those bands separately). Confused? Check out our guide to setting up your smart home.
- Regular maintenance. It might be a robot, but it can't take care of itself. See below for my tips for basic robot vacuum maintenance, and make sure to read your vacuum's manual to know what your specific model requires.
How Often to Maintain Your Robot Vacuum
Taking good care of your robot vacuum will help it last. Here's the debris-removal process you should follow for each robot vacuum style.
- If it has a charger-only base: This means the debris is stored inside the vacuum. You'll likely want to empty it after each use. If your vacuum has a fill line you can watch, you can empty it when it reaches that line, but after each use is really best practice.
- If it has a self-emptying docking station: Each manufacturer will have different advice about when a self-emptying station needs to be emptied, but it's usually between 30 and 60 days, depending on design and use. If you run your vacuum daily and have a lot of debris, like pet hair, you might need to aim for 30 days or less.
- If it has water tanks: Dirty-water tanks should be cleaned after each mopping run of your vacuum. Clean water can stay filled in the station.
Make sure to review your robot vacuum's manual for any other steps the manufacturer recommends you take regularly to keep the vacuum running for as long as possible. Many brands also have replacement parts, so you can swap out individual pieces like brushes without needing an entirely new vacuum.
The Best Robot Vacuums of 2026
I've been testing the latest models from our favorite cleaning brands. Here are the top three I'd buy right now.
I was surprised how much I liked the AI-powered Shark PowerDetect UV Reveal. Its UV light revealed spots on my floor where I know I previously had spills, and its built-in AI had the vacuum go back over to deep-clean those spots in a way I clearly hadn't before. The UV Reveal also did a great job on my hard floors (both LVP and tile) as a mop-and-vacuum combo, as well as on my builder-grade carpet and a large rug in the living room. I was impressed that the rug actually felt just as fluffy and well-vacuumed, as if I had cracked out my favorite Dyson stick vacuum instead of just sending a robot vacuum to do the work for me.
It has an extendable arm, which did a good job passing my corner test. I stuck three Cheerios in tricky corners of my home, and it got two out of three, doing better than the latest Dyson vacuum. It managed to get the trickier two corners, too; it skipped the third Cheerio to avoid bumping my bar stools. I also did a spill test with two spots of cherry juice in my home. It mopped away the first spill with no problem, but I did have to send it back out to finish cleaning the second spill. The UV Reveal did great with obstacle avoidance and has “NeverStuck Technology” to lift itself off of obstacles, and it worked to get itself off the flat, long legs of one of my side tables. The vacuum finished a cleaning run in a good amount of time, cleaning my entire main floor in about 60 minutes, but it does go back out to scrub all the spots it sees on the floor. That took another 30 minutes for me, but I assume that would get shorter over time, the longer you live with this vacuum and have it cleaning up. Still, 93 minutes to run through four rooms and go back to do some scrub work is a solid time window.
Overall, this vacuum really shines on hard floors, but I also did like it on rugs and carpet if you have a mix of these in your home. It has an auto-empty base with a bagless debris system, so you won't need to worry about purchasing debris bags to empty the docking station. The only downside is that the vacuum can only learn a single map, so it doesn't work for multiple floors of your home unless you're game for it to remap every time (which only takes a couple minutes, so it's not a horrible experience, but the vacuum will also want the base station lugged up or down the stairs, too.) The suction is also a mystery; Shark has declined to comment on the exact suction. Still, we've loved low-suction vacuums before, and the results have been great.
| Corner test score | 2 out of 3 Cheerios swept (missed the chair leg Cheerio) |
| Spill test score | 1.5 out of 2 spills cleaned up |
| Navigation type | NeuroNav AI with RGB sensors, lasers, and an UltraRange camera |
| Suction level | Not stated |
| Dual-function mop and vac | Yes |
| Multi-floor mapping | No |
| Debris system | Bagless debris |
If you're looking for vacuuming and mopping but don't want to pay close to or beyond a four-figure sum, this is the vacuum to choose. My colleague Adrienne So previously recommended Eufy's older X10 Pro Omni as a great robot vacuum without spending too much, and Eufy released the Eufy Omni C28 at the end of February with a similar set of features and price point. The Omni C28 comes with nearly double the suction power of the older model, a self-cleaning roller mop instead of mop pads, and retractable detangling brushes.
It does a solid job mopping and vacuuming, but it has a shorter battery life, leaving it at only 37 percent after completing the four-room main floor of my house. This is a bit of a bummer, since this affordable vacuum can do multi-floor mapping. While it can store enough maps to clean all three levels of my home, it doesn't have the battery life to do so. But it does charge fairly quickly, and I was able to still clean all three floors of my house in a single day—I just had to let it recharge a little at the base first. It went back up to 57 percent battery after just 20 minutes in its docking station.
With my corner Cheerio test, this vacuum also got two out of three Cheerios, but it missed the trickier fridge-corner Cheerio. This is the hardest spot to get into, so I'm not surprised, but it does mean you'll have to check those corners more with this vacuum. The cherry juice spill test also showed similar results: the first spot it reached was completely cleaned, while the second spot, which had more time to dry, still had some sticky residue left behind.
Overall, though, it's a good vacuum for the price, especially since it packs multi-floor mapping, the ability to mop and vacuum, and good results all around for a vacuum that's already usually on sale for around $500.
| Corner test score | 2 out of 3 Cheerios swept (missed the fridge Cheerio) |
| Spill test score | 1.5 out of 2 spills cleaned up |
| Navigation type | Laser distance sensor and laser line |
| Suction level | 15,000 Pa |
| Dual-function mop and vac | Yes |
| Multi-floor mapping | Yes |
| Debris system | 3-liter dust bag |
Honorable Mentions
There are a lot of great robot vacuums out there. Here are a few others we've tried and liked.
3i G10+ Robot Vacuum for $200: If you want a super-affordable vacuum with no docking station but still great specs, this is the one to get. It has shockingly powerful suction for the price point (18,000 Pa) and a 1-liter dustbin built into the vacuum. WIRED reviewer Adrienne So was particularly impressed with its navigation and how well it did at edge cleaning. It's a mop, too, which is even more impressive at this price point. If you're looking for cheap but still great, it doesn't get better than this.
Dreame X50 Ultra for $850: If you have pets that tend to make one area of your home particularly hair- or debris-covered, this is the vacuum to get. The Dreame X50 Ultra has tons of great features, including double-roll brushes, side wands for edge cleaning, and a large capacity docking station, but the real standout is the AI that can notice extremely dirty areas. It's the most effective dirt- and obstacle-identification system that WIRED reviewer Adrienne So has tried, and will even remind her which areas it needs to clean more often (for her, that's near her dog's bed).
Dyson Spot+Stain Ai for $850: The Dyson Spot+Stain Ai is a good robot vacuum overall, with a unique base station design that calls back to the Dyson stick vacuums and built-in AI to find spots and stains on your floor to scrub them away. It mostly worked, but I did prefer this feature in the Shark above, which has a similar starting retail price but is usually on sale. It's also a little tall, so if you have builder-grade cabinets like I do, it might not be able to vacuum the toe kicks or underneath your Ikea furniture (it got stuck underneath my Tolstad bed frame and was too tall to get underneath my Besta cabinet).
iRobot Roomba Max 705 Combo for $799: The name Roomba is synonymous with robot vacuums for many people, but it's actually a specific line made by iRobot. I really liked both the high-end look of the Max 705 Combo (not to be confused with the cheaper Max 705) and the overall job it did mopping and cleaning my floors. The app is great since it shows you a map of where the robot went, and it'll also show you a little itinerary of which rooms it's doing in what order.
Matic Robot Vacuum for $1,245: According to WIRED reviewer Adrienne So, this vacuum is spectacular. It's the only 10/10 rating she's ever given a robot vacuum. Its six RGB infrared cameras do a great job making a 3D map, the single waste bag contains wet and dry debris, it does a great job cleaning toe kicks, and it was quiet enough to run without bothering So's kids while they watched TV. That's due to Matic's lower-suction power (only 3,200 Pa), but she didn't notice any decrease in cleanliness as a result. It's compact and square, giving it the ability to really get into corners. The only bummer is that it has expensive, proprietary waste bags. But those waste bags do have diaper salts, charcoal, and a HEPA filter, so you don't have to replace the filters separately.
Narwal Flow for $1,150: WIRED's Reviews team hasn't always had success with Narwal's vacuums, but when I tested this model late last year, I found it super easy to set up and get cleaning. I had no connectivity issues, installation was a breeze, and the app was easy to navigate. It did a good job cleaning my hard floors and rug, and even when I ran it right out of the box until it ran out of battery, it returned itself to its station to recharge and then resumed the task a few hours later, all on its own. The base station is also sleek and cute compared to the dark, bulky structures most have.
Roborock Qrevo Curv for $850: This is an older 2024 flagship model from Roborock, and WIRED reviewer Ryan Waniata says it's the best robot vacuum he's ever used. Even though it's not new, it's still a great vacuum with a great price point and is often on sale.
Other Robot Vacuums We’ve Tested
Eufy S2 for $1,623: This robot vacuum has an intense-looking base station. But I was disappointed it missed both the fridge and bookshelf Cheerios in my corner test, giving it only a one out of three. Both cherry stains were scrubbed away, but the floor near where the stains were felt like it was sticky all over even with the stains technically wiped away. It's especially a bummer given the price point.
Mova P10 Pro Ultra Gen2 for $500: This robot vacuum was solid, and especially did a good job with cleaning corners (it got a two out of three on the corner test, capturing both the stool and fridge Cheerios), but did a poor job scrubbing away the cherry juice for my stain tests. One of the two stains was almost entirely left behind, and overall on casual runs of the vacuum it didn't feel like my floors were super clean. Still, if you're looking for good corner cleaning and carpets more than hard-floor deep cleaning, this is a solid robot vacuum for the price.
Roborock Saros 20 for $1,600: WIRED reviewer Adrienne So was mostly happy with this robot vacuum, but she noticed the super-high suction (it hits 36,000 Pa) actually caused more debris to be left behind on her hard floors, specifically on the divider when it moved from her carpet onto hard flooring. The stain detection feature also didn't impress her (though it is still in beta), and the Adaptilift wasn't able to lift itself out of her fireplace area. We're in touch with Roborock to resolve these issues.
How I Test Robot Vacuums
I test all robot vacuums in my three-story townhouse, where they clean across luxury vinyl plank (LVP), tile, carpet, and a large low-pile rug. I have a dining table and four barstools to navigate, and both a cat and a child who create daily messes. I run the vacuum at least three times across the main floors of my home to assess its overall performance and note any recurring issues or errors it encounters. I do pick up my son's toys, but I like to watch how the robot navigates the various chair legs and side tables throughout my home, and whether it sucks up the power cords beside my bed. I also like to see how much battery life is left after a run is complete on each level of my home.
I also set up an obstacle course of sorts. The first one is the corner test, created by three Cheerios placed in three tricky corners on the middle floor of my home: one in the corner of an Ikea Billy bookshelf toe kick, one underneath my countertops next to the fridge, and one next to a barstool chair leg. It's how I test how well each robot vacuum gets into corners and underneath cabinetry.
I also create intentional spills for these vacuums to clean up. I use maraschino cherry juice to create two spill spots, then use a paper towel to smear and thin the stain to better replicate a spill you might not have seen on your floors. Many robot vacuums have AI that promises to detect these kinds of stains, but so far, no vacuum has stopped and scrubbed both spots on its first try.
Frequently Asked Questions
Do I Still Need a Regular Vacuum if I Have a Robot Vacuum?
I recommend keeping some kind of vacuum on hand, though that can vary based on your home. If you have stairs, you'll definitely still want a hand vacuum or stick vacuum that can easily maneuver and clean your staircase, while pet owners might want a vacuum that can clean upholstery. I prefer my Dyson stick vacuums for a good carpet clean, but your mileage may vary depending on your preferences. Either way, I think everyone needs a companion vacuum of some kind.
Do You Need a Self-Emptying Dock?
You don't need it, but a self-emptying dock makes using a robot vacuum much easier. You aren't fumbling with debris every time it runs, and having a single bag to remove or a bin to empty is much easier than pulling debris out of the vacuum itself. I'd even recommend choosing a stick vac with a self-emptying dock, as it just makes the whole experience so much easier.
How Does WIRED Obtain Robot Vacuums? What Happens When We’re Doing Testing?
Almost all the robot vacuums we test are provided to us as press samples with the understanding that there is no guarantee of coverage or type of coverage. Most companies don't want a used vacuum back, so we either donate them locally or have the top performers long-term tested to see how they last.
Power up with unlimited access to WIRED. Get best-in-class reporting and exclusive subscriber content that's too important to ignore. Subscribe Today.