Doomscrolling on social media is a very common problem and can feel like an endless loop of constantly losing track of time. Instead of tackling this issue with strict limits, a new mindful screen time app called Mivo Scrolling is trying to shake things up.
Launched last month, Mivo doesn’t look much different from other screen time apps. It tracks screen time and usage patterns, and provides insights into daily habits. However, Mivo believes what sets its app apart is its no-shaming approach. The idea that users should be more intentional about their time online has also been fueling the slow tech movement as of late, which is focused on rethinking our relationship with technology.
Rather than outright blocking certain apps, users can set customizable time limits for how long they wish to scroll on specific platforms. For instance, users can schedule two daily scroll sessions, allocating one-hour windows during which they select the apps they want to focus on. When it’s time to take a break, a friendly reminder pops up, nudging them to think about why they’re scrolling right then. Is it out of boredom, looking for a distraction, or genuinely trying to relax?
Notably, unlike other apps that might just try to pull you away from your phone, Mivo lets the user decide if they want to continue, encouraging users to become more aware of how and why they’re using it instead.
“Most screen time tools try to restrict people after the habit is already happening,” Pranshu Raithatha, creator of Mivo Scrolling, told TechCrunch. “Mivo adds a small reflection moment right when someone opens a social app, so they can pause and ask why they’re opening it before falling into an automatic scroll.”
Additionally, users can set regular pauses every two, three, or five minutes, encouraging intermittent check-ins that help maintain awareness of their scrolling habits. Plus, after the scrolling session, Mivo asks the user if they feel like the time was well spent or if they just got lost in the scroll, aiming to help users build a healthier relationship with their phone.
Mivo also includes a widget that users can install on their home screen to display daily scroll time and be reminded of when the next scheduled scroll session is.
Mivo Scrolling is currently available for free on the App Store.