Computer Science > Robotics
Title:PoLAR: Factorizing Extent and Mode in Latent Actions for Robot Policy Learning
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Latent action pretraining learns representations of visual change from pairs of observations, but existing methods typically encode each transition as a single unstructured representation that entangles transition extent and transition mode. We introduce Polar Latent Actions with Radial structure (PoLAR), which imposes a radial-direction structure on latent actions, encouraging radius to encode transition extent and direction to retain transition mode. PoLAR uses temporal offset between two observations as a weak proxy for transition extent, encouraging latent action from observation pairs separated by larger temporal gaps to occupy larger radii. We instantiate this structure in hyperbolic space, whose expanding volume with radius offers a natural fit for more diverse transition modes at larger extents. Across in-task and large-scale pretraining settings, PoLAR improves downstream policy performance in simulation and real-world robot experiments, outperforming latent action baselines and strong pretrained VLAs. These results suggest that the geometry of the latent action space is an important design choice for transferring visual pretraining to downstream robot policy learning.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.