It's rare that you can say a game will be the bestselling game of that year, and the likely Game of the Year winner, before it's even released, let alone years in advance. But that's where we're at with Grand Theft Auto 6, which is set to come out this year, and publisher Rockstar Games confirmed that preorders will begin on June 25.
Calling GTA 6 a highly anticipated game doesn't do it justice. It's been more than a decade since the release of GTA 5, and after multiple delays, the latest entry in the GTA franchise is on its way. Will GTA 6 be the greatest game ever created? Who knows, but the excitement for it will get to a fever pitch as the year progresses.
What is the release date for GTA 6?
GTA 6 is currently expected to be released on Nov. 19, 2026. The game was initially slated for a 2025 release, but was twice delayed, to a May 2026 release, then to November.
Is GTA 6 available for preorder?
GTA 6 is not yet available for preorder, but Rockstar did confirm on Thursday that preorders will start on June 25.
Pre-orders for Grand Theft Auto VI will officially begin on June 25 on digital storefronts and at other select retailers.
— Rockstar Games (@RockstarGames) June 18, 2026
Check out the official cover art, also available as downloadable artwork at https://t.co/XPwC8URCQ4 pic.twitter.com/pRVXk4eyDQ
Which platforms will GTA 6 be available for?
So far, GTA 6 is coming to the PS5 and Xbox Series X and S consoles. GTA 6 will likely come out on PC, but it won't be at launch. There is currently no word on GTA 6 coming to the Switch 2.
How much will GTA 6 cost?
The standard price for big-budget games is $70, but there has been speculation that GTA 6 could cost more. There are even some experts who speculate that it could cost up to $100.
Strauss Zelnick, the CEO and chairman of Rockstar Games' parent company, Take-Two Interactive, said last June that gamers will have an experience at a "fair price." A likely scenario is that GTA 6 could cost $80, a price Nintendo used first for the release of Mario Kart World for the Switch 2.
Where does GTA 6 take place?
GTA 6's setting is the state of Leonida, the fictional version of Florida. It'll include some time in the big city and surrounding areas, including the coasts and swamplands. The star of the game will be the return to Vice City, a fictitious version of Miami. GTA 6 takes place in a modern setting, so don't expect the '80s version players first experienced in GTA: Vice City.
What is GTA 6's story?
Jason Duval and Lucia Caminos are two criminals in love. Jason has been working for drug runners, and in the opening, he's on his way to pick up Lucia from the Leonida Penitentiary. She was serving time for an unknown crime, but it involved protecting her family. The two will work together to improve their lives one crime at a time.
What else is new in GTA 6?
The big innovation coming to GTA 6 is the dual protagonists. This system will be similar to the three-protagonist setup from GTA 5, but expect Jason and Lucia to be playable in certain missions. Rockstar includes RPG elements that let the protagonists customize their bodies based on the food they eat and the exercises they do. There will also be a wealth of changes that modernize the gameplay, such as making melee attacks more realistic and improving gun controls.
Will there be a new GTA Online?
A new version of GTA Online is expected, featuring the new game engine and setting, but Rockstar hasn't confirmed this yet. Since its release in 2013 for GTA 5, GTA Online has made almost $10 billion for Rockstar. The company will likely want to keep that going, but it remains to be seen how it will handle the transition from one online version to another. There is a considerable number of players who have invested a lot of money into various digital assets within the game.