Computer Science > Robotics
Title:One Demo is Worth a Thousand Trajectories: Action-View Augmentation for Visuomotor Policies
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Visuomotor policies for manipulation have demonstrated remarkable potential in modeling complex robotic behaviors, yet minor alterations in the robot's initial configuration and unseen obstacles easily lead to out-of-distribution observations. Without extensive data collection effort, these result in catastrophic execution failures. In this work, we introduce an effective data augmentation framework that generates visually realistic fisheye image sequences and corresponding physically feasible action trajectories from real-world eye-in-hand demonstrations, captured with a portable parallel gripper with a single fisheye camera. We introduce a novel Gaussian Splatting formulation, adapted to wide FoV fisheye cameras, to reconstruct and edit the 3D scene with unseen objects. We utilize trajectory optimization to generate smooth, collision-free, view-rendering-friendly action trajectories and render visual observations from corresponding novel views. Comprehensive experiments in simulation and the real world show that our augmentation framework improves the success rate for various manipulation tasks in both the same scene and the augmented scene with obstacles requiring collision avoidance.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.