Physics > Geophysics
Title:Data assimilation for subsurface flow using latent diffusion model parameterization: performance of ensemble-Kalman and Monte Carlo techniques
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Data assimilation (DA) in subsurface flow entails calibrating model parameters to match observed data, typically at wells, while preserving geological realism. Latent diffusion models (LDMs) provide efficient mappings from high-dimensional geological model space to a low-dimensional latent variable, reducing the dimensionality of the inverse problem while maintaining plausibility in posterior geomodels. However, the high nonlinearity in the LDM mapping may degrade the performance of Kalman-gain-based ensemble updates. We present a systematic comparison of DA algorithms applied to large-scale 3D channelized geomodels with hierarchical geological uncertainty. We compare model-space and latent-space DA using the ensemble smoother with multiple data assimilation (ESMDA), and demonstrate a key trade-off: model-space updates achieve significant uncertainty reduction but produce geologically unrealistic posterior models, while latent-space updates preserve realism but exhibit limited uncertainty reduction. Motivated by this, we explore rigorous Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithms in the 3D-LDM latent space. To accommodate their high computational demands, we develop a fast surrogate flow model that approximates well-rate responses. MCMC and SMC are evaluated against ESMDA across three synthetic test cases, with DA performed in the LDM latent space. All models maintain geological realism due to the LDM parameterization. MCMC and SMC are consistent with one another and achieve lower data mismatch and more uncertainty reduction than latent-space ESMDA. Our overall results demonstrate that ensemble Kalman methods may provide overestimated posterior uncertainty with highly nonlinear parameterizations, while rigorous Monte Carlo sampling, enabled by fast surrogate models, can provide a more reliable alternative.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.