Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Title:FoA-SR: Faithful or Aesthetic? Profile-Aware Preference Optimization for Real-World Image Super-Resolution
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Real-world image super-resolution (SR) is often designed with a single restoration objective, despite the current capacity of generative models to produce multiple high-quality reconstructions for the same input. In this paper, we argue that the best restoration strategy is subject to the specific restoration profile: a Faithful restoration prioritizes reference consistency, structure preservation, and hallucination suppression, whereas an Aesthetic restoration prioritizes visually pleasing and natural-looking details. We propose FoA-SR, a novel preference optimization approach to real-world SR based on profiles. To achieve this goal, FoA-SR starts with our supervised FLUX.2-based SR adapter (Flux2SR) trained with LR latent conditioning, flow matching, and image-space reconstruction losses for paired LR-to-HR image super-resolution. Following the development of the shared supervised super-resolution adapter, FoA-SR generates a shared stochastic candidate pool for each input image and ranks the same candidates using profile-specific Faithful and Aesthetic rewards to mine winner-loser pairs. These pairs are used to fine-tune separate LoRA adapters while keeping the base model frozen. Experiments on RealSR and DIV2K show that FoA-SR can steer the same SR adapter towards distinct restoration objectives: a Faithful adapter improves reference-consistent metrics while an Aesthetic adapter boosts metrics that measure perceptual quality without reference. Our candidate-pool analysis shows that Faithful and Aesthetic rewards frequently select different winners, and a Hybrid-LoRA ablation shows that collapsing both profiles into one reward yields an implicit compromise rather than explicit profile control.
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.