Computer Science > Robotics
Title:What Matters in Orchestrating Robot Policies: A Systematic Study of Hierarchical VLA Agents
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Hierarchical vision-language-action (Hi-VLA) systems have emerged as a promising paradigm for complex robot manipulation, by using high-level VLM planners to decompose tasks into language subgoals executed by low-level VLA controllers. Despite recent empirical progress, there is a lack of unified design principles for these systems: existing Hi-VLA systems differ in how they choose and connect planners, controllers, mechanisms to switch between the two, and how observations and memory are represented in the planner. In this paper, we present a systematic study of Hi-VLA design for robot manipulation. We unify representative Hi-VLA agents under an options-style control framework and benchmark core design choices across short-horizon, long-horizon, and reasoning-intensive tasks. Our analysis distills practical principles for building Hi-VLA systems, showing how model choices and interface mechanisms jointly shape performance. Applying these principles yields a substantially stronger system than either flat VLA control or a naively designed hierarchy, across experiments both in simulation and on a real ALOHA robot. Overall, our results provide a foundation for building more capable, robust, and principled hierarchical VLA agents. More information and video at this http URL.
Current browse context:
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.